Session 1 (2001)

Scottish Parliament
Official Report

Vol 10
No 06

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

CONTENTS

Thursday 25 January 2001

Debates


ROADS
Motion moved—[Bruce Crawford].
Amendment moved—[Sarah Boyack].
Amendment to amendment moved—[Mr Murray Tosh].
Bruce Crawford (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
The Minister for Transport (Sarah Boyack)
Mr Murray Tosh (South of Scotland) (Con)
Iain Smith (North-East Fife) (LD)
Mr Andy Kerr (East Kilbride) (Lab)
Shona Robison (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Tommy Sheridan (Glasgow) (SSP)
Mr David Davidson (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Fiona McLeod (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Kate MacLean (Dundee West) (Lab)
Euan Robson (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD)
Alex Neil (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Donald Gorrie (Central Scotland) (LD)
Phil Gallie (South of Scotland) (Con)
Sarah Boyack
Mr Kenneth Gibson (Glasgow) (SNP)

PERSONAL CARE FOR THE ELDERLY
Motion moved—[Nicola Sturgeon].
Amendment moved—[Dr Richard Simpson].
Amendment moved—[Tommy Sheridan].
Nicola Sturgeon (Glasgow) (SNP)
Dr Richard Simpson (Ochil) (Lab)
The Minister for Health and Community Care (Susan Deacon)
Mary Scanlon (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Mr Keith Raffan (Mid Scotland and Fife) (LD)
Christine Grahame (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Mrs Margaret Smith (Edinburgh West) (LD)
Margaret Jamieson (Kilmarnock and Loudoun) (Lab)
Mr Duncan Hamilton (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Bill Aitken (Glasgow) (Con)
Ms Sandra White (Glasgow) (SNP)
Donald Gorrie (Central Scotland) (LD)
Ms Margo MacDonald (Lothians) (SNP)
George Lyon (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
David McLetchie (Lothians) (Con)
The Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care (Malcolm Chisholm)
Tommy Sheridan (Glasgow) (SSP)
Shona Robison (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
BUSINESS MOTION
Motion moved—[Tavish Scott]—and agreed to.

QUESTION TIME
SCOTTISH EXECUTIVE
Adoption
Caledonian MacBrayne (Meetings)
Disability Rights Commission (Meetings)
Minister for Health and Community Care (Meetings)
Mobile Telephone Masts
Paper Industry
Police (Race Relations)
Roads (Signposting)
Scottish Berry Project
Timber Transportation
Transport (Aberdeen)
Young Disabled People
FIRST MINISTER'S QUESTION TIME
SCOTTISH EXECUTIVE
Business (Transport Links)
Expenditure Commitments
Scottish Executive Priorities
Secretary of State for Scotland (Meetings)
BUDGET (SCOTLAND) (NO 2) BILL: STAGE 1
Motion moved—[Angus MacKay].
The Minister for Finance and Local Government (Angus MacKay)
Andrew Wilson (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Mr David Davidson (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Donald Gorrie (Central Scotland) (LD)
Mike Watson (Glasgow Cathcart) (Lab)
Mr Kenneth Gibson (Glasgow) (SNP)
Mr Keith Harding (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
George Lyon (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
Mr Duncan Hamilton (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Elaine Thomson (Aberdeen North) (Lab)
Brian Adam (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Iain Smith (North-East Fife) (LD)
Miss Annabel Goldie (West of Scotland) (Con)
Mr Adam Ingram (South of Scotland) (SNP)
The Deputy Minister for Finance and Local Government (Peter Peacock)
POINTS OF ORDER
PERSONAL CARE FOR THE ELDERLY
Statement—[Mr Tom McCabe].
The Minister for Parliament (Mr Tom McCabe)
DECISION TIME
POINTS OF ORDER
ROBERT BURNS
Motion debated-[David Mundell].
David Mundell (South of Scotland) (Con)
Cathy Jamieson (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab)
Fergus Ewing (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP)
Ian Jenkins (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD)
Phil Gallie (South of Scotland) (Con)
Dorothy-Grace Elder (Glasgow) (SNP)
Mr Jamie Stone (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
Dr Elaine Murray (Dumfries) (Lab)
Dr Winnie Ewing (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Cathy Peattie (Falkirk East) (Lab)
The Deputy Minister for Sport and Culture (Allan Wilson)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Scottish Parliament

Thursday 25 January 2001

[THE DEPUTY PRESIDING OFFICER opened the meeting at 09:30]

Roads

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Mr George Reid): Good morning. The first item of business this morning is a Scottish National Party debate on motion S1M-1584, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on roads in Scotland, and two amendments.

Tommy Sheridan (Glasgow) (SSP): On a point of order, Presiding Officer. It may just be due to the late receipt of amendments, but I notice in the business bulletin that no amendments to motion S1M-1589 have been accepted. I submitted timeously an amendment to that motion, and I seek guidance on whether it has been accepted.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The key to the issue is five paragraphs up from the bottom of page 2 of the business bulletin:

"The Presiding Officer has yet to select any amendments to motion S1M-1589."

Tommy Sheridan: When will an announcement be made on the amendments that have been selected?

The Deputy Presiding Officer: There will be an announcement later in the day.

I call Bruce Crawford to speak to and move the motion. You have 10 minutes.

09:31

Bruce Crawford (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP): The purpose of the SNP motion today is simple and straightforward. We are concerned that the Labour Minister for Transport is embarked upon an irreversible decision-making process that is unfair and unjust. She is set on a course of action that will have a seriously damaging impact on Scotland's capacity to maintain its trunk and local roads to a satisfactory standard, and on its ability to continue with a safe and reliable winter maintenance service. That view is supported widely in the chamber and across the political divides. Today, we ask members to support our motion, not only because their consciences demand it, but, more important, because it is in the interests of good government and best value for the public purse.

Over the past few years, we have heard much from new Labour about the need for joined-up government. We might not always like the soundbites, but no one could deny that the objectives are anything but laudable. However, when faced with the current set of proposals for the trunk road network, only one conclusion can be drawn; that all the talk of joined-up government is no more than a sham. This Parliament cannot allow itself to be blinded by that illusion. We must see the truth about the scale of the mistake that Labour may be about to make, because it is a mistake that will impact on almost every community in Scotland, as potentially thousands of jobs are lost, levels of service deteriorate, and there is chaos during winter emergencies.

I will provide some reasons why I believe that the route upon which the Executive is intent is fundamentally flawed. First, it is obvious from even a cursory glance at the evidence that no real attempt was made before, during or after the tendering process to assess the impact that awarding the work would have on the delivery of services at national and local levels.

To help me to assess the impact, I wrote to every local authority, and I received a plethora of replies. To give a flavour of the responses, I will quote what a few of them say about joined-up government and best value. For example, Stirling Council tells me:

"Private sector contractors maintaining the motorway and trunk road network, quite separate from the local road network, will create duplication of resources and increased costs to the public purse as economies of scale that are achieved by integrated service delivery are lost."

There are many other quotes from Labour-run councils that I could use, so here we have it—Labour councils the length and breadth of Scotland criticising their own Executive.

The immediate impact has been estimated at the loss of anything between 500 and 600 jobs, and anything up to 3,500 jobs once secondary employment issues are taken into account and the effects on economies of scale begin to bite, making direct labour organisations less competitive and unable to win other tender work. Inevitably, that will lead to the closure of local depots and quarries that often are significant employers, particularly in rural areas.

The Minister for Transport has singularly failed to examine the tendering process in an integrated manner. As Aberdeenshire Council put it:

"The Council firmly believe that the principles of Best Value across the public purse as a whole has been ignored by the Scottish Executive."

As a result, the Executive is in danger, by default, of privatising more jobs than the Tories managed to privatise in 18 years. Sarah Boyack said yesterday that the jobs issues were only rumours. If she had taken time to contact only a handful of local authorities, she would have discovered that she is living in a dream world. It is time that she woke up and faced the reality that is staring her in the face. Highland Council said in its letter to me:

"the council would have to shed about 200 staff. Perhaps 100 of these will end up being made redundant and 100 being transferred."

Scottish Borders Council tells me that it will have 50 redundancies, and there will be 30 in East Ayrshire, 28 in Stirling, 23 in Dumfries and 100 across Tayside. The list goes on and on.

Mr Jamie Stone (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD): I am glad that Mr Crawford has mentioned rural areas, and in particular Highland Council. Does he agree that this process is tragic for rural areas? It means rural job losses where we need them least. Worse than that, the process will be irreversible, because it will be impossible for councils to return to roads maintenance once it goes to the private sector. Does he agree that the motion and two amendments that are before us this morning are an obituary for council-run road maintenance?

Bruce Crawford: I agree entirely with Jamie Stone's sentiments. It is sad that we are involved in this process today. I thank him for his comments.

The cost savings that have been projected by the Executive also are an illusion. Sarah Boyack has been seduced by so-called large savings that simply are not deliverable. The vexed issue of quantities sometimes is complex and difficult to get one's head around. However, a glaring example exists in the north-west tender assessment process. The assessment showed that the quantities of new road signs indicated a replacement cycle of four to 20 weeks, which compares with a life expectancy of 15 years for the signs.

The quality assessment process is littered with such examples and the only conclusion can be that the whole process is flawed. According to a report yesterday from Perth and Kinross Council, the process is flawed to the extent that it has been estimated to have caused the north-west bid to be overestimated by as much as £68 million and the north-east unit by as much as £21 million. Due to the distortions in the quantities, the savings that the Executive has claimed will never materialise and the eventual contract outturn price will bear no relationship to the basis on which the tenders were assessed.

It is now established best practice to consider both quality and price. In England, the process is weighted so that 60 per cent is applied to quality and 40 per cent to price. What do we find in Scotland? Astonishingly, the Executive departed from best practice by deciding that a simple quality threshold would apply so that all the weighting would be applied to price alone.

Such details will be examined by the Transport and the Environment Committee but, by the time that it carries out its deliberation, folks, it is going to be too late, unless the Parliament helps today by persuading Labour to put the tendering exercise on hold and carry out a comprehensive review of the flawed process.

You know, Presiding Officer, I am sorry, but sod this—

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Order. Language.

Bruce Crawford: I apologise for the language, but this has been a charade. I know that the arguments that I am presenting are well researched and are as accurate as possible—and I have another couple of pages that would confirm that there is no justice and no fairness in the tendering process—but all that good argument is not worth a jot, because, unless a good number of Labour back benchers support the SNP's motion, in about seven days the contracts will have been awarded on the basis of a process that is a travesty and a fraud.

Last night, when I heard the news that the Labour back benchers were running up the white flag because they had been given the flimsiest of amendments on an escape route to support the Government, I was gutted. Not gutted for myself, but gutted for the guys who drive the snowploughs and the gritters, the guys who operate the road-rollers and the JCBs, the guys who are the roadmen and the fencers—

Mr Andy Kerr (East Kilbride) (Lab) rose—

Kate MacLean (Dundee West) (Lab) rose—

Bruce Crawford: Aye, ye dinnae like it when ye're getting it this way.

I was gutted for the men who are at the front line of service delivery all across Scotland.

Mr Kerr: Will the member take an intervention?

Bruce Crawford: I am just winding up.

Those people will today see a great injustice. That great injustice will be done because not enough people in the Labour party have had the backbone or courage to stand up to a minister who patently does not understand what is going on and does not care about the implications of her decisions beyond the narrow boundaries of her own budget.

Not enough Labour back benchers have the spine to ensure that justice and fairness carry the day. This is the day on which Labour in Scotland will be known for running up the flag of the unfettered free market, which knows the cost of everything and the value of nothing. Labour back benchers should all hang their heads in shame. Come 5 o'clock tonight, their founding fathers will birl in their graves, unless Labour back benchers prove me wrong and vote to give justice and fairness a chance. They could vote for a motion that is crafted to attract as much support from around the chamber as possible and leave open opportunities for others. I commend Murray Tosh on his amendment to amendment S1M-1584.1.

People are not happy. I am not prepared to accept the Executive's dangerous proposals. Murray Tosh may find that his amendment receives the SNP's support. The choice for members is between a fraud of a tendering process and justice and fairness. Scotland's council workers are relying on members to make the right decision. If they do not, local government workers will never forgive them and will consider the act nothing short of treachery.

I move,

That the Parliament expresses its grave concern over the tendering process for the award of the contracts for the management and maintenance of the trunk road network; in particular notes that there are wide concerns about the contract assessment process, the future operation of the trunk road service and the potential knock-on implications for local authorities and others, and also expresses its deep regret that the Scottish Executive has failed to respond fully to the substantial and detailed submissions by the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, individual councils and others.

09:41

The Minister for Transport (Sarah Boyack): In speaking to the Executive's amendment, I will place on the record the facts. I emphasise that, because so much inaccurate information has appeared. I welcome the debate, as it gives me the opportunity to raise some key issues. Bruce Crawford's speech repeated some inaccurate comments that have flown around in the past few weeks and relied a great deal on rhetoric.

The contracts that local authorities won in 1996 expire at the end of March this year. The consultation on re-tendering began as long ago as April 1999. The consultation paper received 66 responses, 27 of which came from local authorities. Many of the respondents saw advantage in the four operating companies concept. The Executive undertook further analysis in a value management workshop, which included local authority practitioners.

It was clear from the outset that we would adhere to the Public Works Contracts Regulations 1991, which implemented European Community competition requirements. They require the placement of new work to be subject to open competition between competent service providers. Competition rules apply to the process, and the Scotland Act 1998 would nullify any other course of action.

Mr Kerr: Will the minister take an intervention?

Sarah Boyack: To be fair, I will not, because I would like to get into my speech, and I know that members will have many points.

The decision to proceed to tender for four operating companies was announced in December 1999, and tender documents were issued in May 2000. Officials responded to 433 tender inquiries, issued 30 tender bulletins and held three consultation meetings with each tenderer. All tenders were submitted by 31 October. They were assessed before cash bids were evaluated to ensure that they met the stipulated quality standards. Quality ran through the whole process. The quality proposals were carefully scrutinised, and clarification was sought from tenderers as necessary. All met the quality standard, and only then were the cash bids assessed.

Ministers have been aware of the outcome of the competition for more than a month. We took that period to question our officials closely about the rigour and the fairness of the competition and the extent of the external validation. The courts have also examined the competition, and their judgments vindicate the Executive's report.

Shona Robison (North-East Scotland) (SNP): The minister just said that the courts vindicated the Executive's position, but did not the judge of the north-east challenge find that the petitioners had made a prima facie case, although the case was rejected for timing reasons? The minister is telling the Parliament an untruth. Will she correct what she said?

Sarah Boyack: I am happy to clarify that point. The member misinterprets the legal judgment. Four actions were taken against the Executive. The Executive appealed against and won the first action and was awarded costs. I do not regard that as the Executive's position being overturned in the courts.

That led to our announcement on Tuesday that, subject to the external review of the quantities issue, we intended to award two contracts each to Amey and Bear Scotland Ltd.

Fergus Ewing (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP): Will the minister give way?

Sarah Boyack: No.

Those bids will provide the same or higher standards of maintenance, for lower costs. We are getting a better deal for taxpayers' money. Amey is experienced in motorway maintenance in Scotland and England, and Bear Scotland has conducted ringway construction and has experience in England.

Maureen Macmillan (Highlands and Islands) (Lab) rose—

Alex Neil (Central Scotland) (SNP): Will the minister give way?

Sarah Boyack: No, I have already taken interventions.

The Amey bids for the south-east and south-west are worth £176 million over the five years and offer savings of £50 million over the existing arrangements. The Bear Scotland bids for the north-east and north-west units are worth £182 million over the five years and offer a saving of £25 million over the present cost.

The Executive is committed to delivering best value for every penny that we spend. How could we or any other Administration justify accepting bids that offered significantly poorer value for money?

Fiona McLeod (West of Scotland) (SNP) rose—

Mr Gil Paterson (Central Scotland) (SNP) rose—

Sarah Boyack: Members will all speak later. I will reply at the end of the debate.

There is no member who has not lobbied me on roads expenditure in writing or in the chamber. The demand by members for investment is enormous. This week alone, I announced that the extension to the M74 would go ahead, for which members lobbied hard. Like every other minister, I must work within my budget and the Executive's agreed priorities.

The impact on staffing is a concern to me and to members. I refute Bruce Crawford's interpretation of what I said the other night. However, some of the figures that have flown around have been totally irresponsible.

Mr Kenneth Gibson (Glasgow) (SNP): Will the minister give way?

Sarah Boyack: No.

I have read about figures of between 3,500 and 35,000. Those suggestions have heightened the concerns of employees and the trade unions. In its briefing to MSPs, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities made it clear that it estimates that well in excess of 500 full-time staff are involved in trunk road work. I do not pretend for one minute that the issue is not major and that potentially major change does not affect local authority employees. The new and the existing operators must address the impact properly and resolve it quickly. I fully expect the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations to apply.

Mr Murray Tosh (South of Scotland) (Con): Will the minister give way?

Sarah Boyack: No, because Murray Tosh will speak next.

I want to respond to the comments that I have heard and received from COSLA and the local authorities. I acknowledge that in the Executive's amendment. I understand well their deep concerns about the importance of the contracts. However, it is untrue that the process was flawed and skewed against the local authorities. The process has been transparent, and extensive consultation took place before and during the tendering process.

I have a direct question. Have any of the Executive's critics stopped to ask why civil servants would seek to disadvantage local authorities and abuse the contract rules? That is the suggestion that is being made. There is no evidence to support that assertion and I refute it. Numerous detailed points have been made about the tendering process, and I ask why they were not raised during the extensive consultations. [MEMBERS: "They were."]

As a Labour minister, I am extremely disappointed with the bids that the local authorities submitted, especially because they were substantially higher than current spending. Local authorities are the existing contractors. They could share depots and staff to exploit economies of scale, and they have direct labour organisation operations that use best-value principles. Local authorities have all those advantages, so I am deeply disappointed, because they should have been well placed to win the contracts.

We are nearing the end of a long and complicated tendering process. The contractors must meet the standards and the quality specified at the rates quoted. As I announced in a written answer this week, the one remaining element of the audit process must be conducted before the contracts are signed. We will continue to respond to the points that members raise.

I fully understand the disappointment of local authorities about the results of the competition. It is important that the rigorous process of assessment and audit is properly carried out before the contracts are signed. Local authorities will have the opportunity to tender for the repair contracts and subcontract work across the motorway and trunk road network, which are expected to be substantial. The Scottish Executive manages that work by setting its framework. In addition, the Executive is investing heavily in local roads maintenance through the capital and revenue allocations that Angus MacKay announced on 7 December. That capital allocation includes an additional £70 million for local authorities over the next three years. Local road work is the major part of local authority maintenance activity.

I do not pretend for one minute that the issue is not difficult for all members, particularly those in my party. As Minister for Transport, I have to make difficult choices all the time. I have to manage the competing demands we face in renewing, maintaining and investing in our vital transport infrastructure.

In acknowledging that local authorities and trade unions are concerned and that we will continue to respond to those concerns, I move amendment S1M-1584.1, to leave out from "expresses" to end and insert:

"recognises the strong concerns expressed by the local government consortia and trade unions about the award of the contracts for the management and maintenance of the trunk road network; in particular notes their concerns about the contract assessment process, the future operation of the trunk road services and the potential knock-on implications for local authorities, and calls upon the Executive to continue further exploration of all outstanding issues."

09:50

Mr Murray Tosh (South of Scotland) (Con): I am aware that, for a long time, the existing contractors, the local authorities and all the relevant people have been deeply concerned and have made representations—some public and many private—about the tendering process. The argument that the local authorities have said nothing until recently simply does not hold water. What is true is that the case from the local authorities on the detailed manner of assessing the contracts has been made only recently, because the method of allocating the contracts has begun to filter through only in the past few weeks.

I see a perfectly good reason why civil servants might seek to batch and allocate the contracts in this way: the resource transfer between local government and central Government. If we work this so that the savings are taken centrally and we do not care about the local impact, we have a strategy that advantages us and does down our partners in local government.

I want to pick the minister up on the point about local authorities having the opportunity to tender for repair work. How can a local authority maintain staff, equipment, plant and depots on the basis of discretionary contracts that it might or might not win? The minister's point was neither sensible nor valid. If anything characterises Sarah Boyack's career as a minister it is the emphasis that she has repeatedly put on consultation, transparency and partnership. She has been patently sincere in that. What makes this issue so bewildering is that so much of that emphasis by the minister appears to be missing.

Historically, local authorities have been the partners of central Government in the maintenance of the road network; logistically and logically, they still are. In the Highland region, for example, the same vehicles maintain trunk roads and local roads—the work is integrated. Roads officers all over Scotland have said that. It is not reasonable for the Executive to act as if only central Government budgets are involved. I have had answers to parliamentary questions in which the minister has said that it is not a matter for her to deal with. She may be concerned, but she has not evaluated the impact on local government.

Iain Smith (North-East Fife) (LD): I am a little bemused by Murray Tosh's contribution. Does he not recognise that the whole process of divorcing trunk road maintenance contracts from local authorities was begun by the Conservatives when they were in government? They began the process of the new contracts. Does Mr Tosh not accept some responsibility for the road that we have come down?

Mr Tosh: As the minister made clear, our laws of competitive tendering are firmly rooted in European Union competition law. I do not regret or deplore that fact, and I am astonished that Mr Smith should. I have no difficulty with competitive tendering or with a process that allocates the work to the contractor who puts forward the best quality and best value offer. I thought that I had made it clear that what I am concerned about is that I do not believe that this process has been handled transparently, that it has involved the local authorities or that it has taken into account the impact of separating local authority work from central Government work, as the division between the two is often highly arbitrary.

Fergus Ewing: Will the member give way?

Alex Neil: Will the member give way?

Mr Tosh: No.

There are matters in the Executive amendment that require to be fleshed out. What does the final phrase in the amendment—

"to continue further exploration of all outstanding issues"—

mean? Are we assured that, in considering those outstanding issues, central Government will consider the impact on local government and on potentially transferred employees? Will it have something to say to the South Ayrshire Council officer who faxed me yesterday to say that, in their assessment, 22 people in their office would not be covered by TUPE regulations?

Will the evaluation take care of the concerns raised by the north-east and north-west consortia about the application of the algorithm that is the method of calculation for the contracts? Sums of money have been bandied about. It is not like a contract for a building, where we know what the final price is. This is not a sum of money—it is a process; it is a formula. The local authorities believe that the application of that formula on a basis other than historical information about the volume of materials and the aggregate volume of work carried out distorts the impact of their bid and loads up their prices and their costs.

There is so much that we need to know about what is implied in the Executive amendment by "exploration of outstanding issues". Does it mean that the contracts will not be awarded until we have sorted it all out? At the end of the day, I am happy to award the contract to whoever has won it fairly and will give the best value. However, that has to be good value for the public purse. The contract must be awarded on the basis that we know that the overall impact on central Government and local government is sound, economical, good value and that it gets us the best use of the available resources. I do not disagree with the minister's objectives. I am simply not satisfied that she has demonstrated that she can achieve them.

I move amendment S1M-1584.1.1 to amendment S1M-1584.1, to insert at end:

"and further expresses concern that the separation of trunk from non-trunk roads for management and maintenance work hitherto carried out on a combined basis may diminish overall operational efficiency and value for money, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to conduct an urgent analysis of the impact of disaggregation of combined operations and to report back to the Parliament on proposals necessary to achieve optimum operational efficiency and value for money across the network as a whole."

09:56

Iain Smith (North-East Fife) (LD): Many of my concerns have already been expressed in the debate, but I regret that the SNP amendment expresses concern only; it does not suggest any way forward. The Executive amendment at least calls on the Executive to continue to explore the issues—that is an important step beyond the SNP's proposal. The issues must be explored. There is nothing in the SNP motion that asks anyone to do anything. As usual, the SNP is happy to complain about things but not to provide any solutions.

There are problems with the whole operation—it can hardly be said to have been transparent. The consultation period ran from April to May 1999, when the Scottish Parliament and the local authorities were rather busy with elections. The result of the consultation was published on 24 December 1999—a good day for getting lots of publicity, considering how many newspapers were published on the 25th. The tender was, I believe, announced on a Friday afternoon in the middle of the Easter recess last year—that hardly suggests that a great attempt has been made to ensure that the public and the political community were fully involved in scrutinising the matter.

The tender process has been shrouded in mystery. There is a lack of clarity about what was being tendered for, and smoke and mirrors about how the tender was assessed. There are real doubts about the fairness and accuracy of the results. As Bruce Crawford said, Perth and Kinross has produced a detailed report of some of the problems, which indicates concerns that, for example, sign replacement appears to be worth 11.4 per cent in the contracts, rather than the 1.6 per cent that is the reality, while winter maintenance is 13 per cent of the contract value, when it is in fact more like 22 per cent. The minister should address those concerns.

There has been a lack of political and policy input into the process. There is suspicion that the process has been driven by officials who have been following an anti-local government and pro-privatisation agenda, with little understanding of the realities of how road contracts work. Value for money has not been properly considered; it has been considered in terms of Scottish Executive costs, but not in terms of the cost to the public purse.

Mr Paterson: Will the member give way?

Iain Smith: I am sorry, but I do not have time to take any interventions, as it is a short debate.

The officials do not appear to have understood the importance of trunk road work to the viability of the local roads operations that are carried out by councils. They do not understand, for example, integrated winter gritting. A snowplough does not run up a trunk road then back to its depot; it goes off and clears other important roads, such as side roads, bus routes and roads to schools. That will all be lost.

The officials do not seem to understand the economies of scale relating to the provision of plant and premises. The purchase of materials is important to the viability of the local roads network. The officials do not seem to understand the need to ensure an overall work load that is sufficient to maintain a viable work force, in order to have the winter maintenance staff available to keep our roads safe in winter. That is an important point. The small part of the trunk road contract that goes to the design work of local council officials enables them to keep expertise for road safety work, new roads and footpaths and bridge works. It is all important—they all rely on trunk road work.

The minister must, in summing up, answer some of the questions that I have previously put to her on these issues. I ask her again to consider delaying the implementation of any contracts by six months to allow proper discussion with local authorities and the new contractors on how the contracts will be implemented. Who will clear a road that is covered in snow at midnight on 31 March this year? I am damned sure that there is no clarity about who will be able to do that job by then. We have to ensure that we get through that period of interim changes by delaying the implementation of the contracts.

I strongly urge the minister to conduct a full study into the implications for local councils and the additional costs that they will face as a result of those contracts. I also ask her to give a commitment that the Scottish Executive will meet any additional costs that local authorities incur as a result of those contracts being awarded. That is very important.

It has become clear that there are real doubts about the assessment of the tenders. There must be a full independent review of the methods and results of the assessment of the contracts before they are signed. The contracts have not yet been signed—

Bruce Crawford: Where is the independent review to get to the bottom of this?

Iain Smith: That is one of the issues that has yet to be explored. I urge the minister to give us an assurance that she will go beyond the limited review of the quantities part of the contract and will instigate a full and proper independent assessment of the results of the tenders before the contracts are signed. That is one of the outstanding issues that have yet to be explored. I am glad that the Transport and the Environment Committee will be exploring many of those issues, and I seek an assurance from the minister that they will be explored. At least the Executive amendment calls for continued exploration of the issues, rather than moaning like the SNP.

10:01

Mr Andy Kerr (East Kilbride) (Lab): I am extremely disappointed by the minister's statement. I have absolutely no confidence in Sarah Boyack's judgment on the matter. We are on the edge of making one of the Parliament's worst decisions in its short life. It is a personal and political embarrassment that we find ourselves arguing over such issues in the Parliament. Allowing the management and maintenance contracts to go ahead as planned would be one of the worst decisions that we could possibly make. A flawed process has led to a flawed result—that is what I shall focus on. I have long experience of contracting in the public and private sectors and the current flawed process does not, in any way, offer value for money and it does not provide best value. The process is a shambles.

This is not a battle about public versus private or direct labour organisations versus the private sector. The DLOs are in partnership with many blue chip companies—companies whose joint submissions were based on good tendering practice in the public and private sectors. There should be a level playing field.

Let us go back to the start of the process. Local authorities were consulted and there were meetings, but were the authorities listened to? I have my doubts. Local authorities raised major issues during the consultation process. Bruce Crawford said that he had been writing to local authorities during the past week or so. I have been meeting and writing to them for the past 14 months on the issue. I have correspondence dated 16 January, which refers to previous meetings. We find ourselves in a sad situation today.

Quality is not at the forefront of the contracts, nor is it built into them. In 1995, I was writing contracts that built quality into the process; not in England, where there were 60:40 price-quality splits, but in Glasgow, where I wrote them with a 50:50 price-quality split. I tell the minister that the contract strategy is flawed—it is 10 years out of date. Compulsory competitive tendering mark 1 has been used during the tendering process. No modern tendering processes have been brought to bear on the issue.

Frequencies are the nub of the issue. As many members have said, that continues to skew the local authorities' and their partners' bids in the process. We will fail the public if the contracts are awarded to the private sector.

Shona Robison: Will Andy Kerr give way?

Mr Kerr: I will not accept an intervention from Shona Robison, but I will be happy to accept one from the minister if she disagrees with me.

The contracts present us with an incentive not to maintain Scotland's roads. All the money has been loaded into a lump sum and the private sector will make our roads worse, by aggregating the faults and issuing discrete contracts.

Sarah Boyack: Will Mr Kerr explain how he thinks the lump sum processes work? My information is that the lump sum element for the successful private bidders ranges from 17 per cent to 26 per cent—nowhere near the 80 per cent that he alleges.

Mr Kerr: I did not allege 80 per cent. I ask members to look at the values that are attached to the contracts and at the gaps that exist. The minister must be careful—she should look this gift horse in the mouth. How can a DLO with five years' experience in the business with its private sector partners be 50 per cent out in terms of both the local authority and two private sector bids? I think that that gift horse must be looked in the mouth. Who are the partners? Tarmac, Scott Wilson and Morrison plc. I ask the minister to examine the gap that exists because a huge error is about to be made. The contractors had the experience—they knew the pattern of work and the frequencies and they based their bids on that.

Loss of control concerns us all. The one-stop shop approach and co-ordination with local police services and gritting and winter maintenance services will all be lost—they will be thrown out. The process does not reach even the basics of what I regard as best value. On vindication in the courts, Lord Penrose stated:

"Inviting quotations and quoting rates for unquantified work exposes the employer and the contractor to risk."

If that is total vindication of the Scottish Executive, I do not know what ministers are talking about. There are a number of ways out of the situation; for example, there have been judgments that say that European legislation will allow us to extend the contracts.

I finish by quoting the radical left-wing publication, Contract Journal—a magazine of the private sector—which stated that the Clyde consortium's

"complaint . . . about the tender process for Scotland's trunk road management and maintenance contracts, highlights some of the worst aspects of poor client performance—namely a lack of transparency, a gearing towards price rather than quality and skewing the tendering process away from existing contractors".

It continues:

"Perhaps those concerned should read Modernising Construction, the report published last week by the National Audit Office, to ensure that the taxpayer receives value for money on government procured construction projects. It explains to the government what many others already know—that awarding contracts on the basis of the lowest price is a fallacy and that it often leads to grossly inflated prices".

We are on the verge of a decision and I hope that the minister will reconsider her view. At the moment, we are in the jaws of defeat, but I hope that the minister will listen to this morning's debate and do what members have called for, which is to delay awarding the contract, revisit the issue and award the contract on a fair and equitable basis.

10:06

Shona Robison (North-East Scotland) (SNP): It gives me no pleasure to speak in this debate because I sense an ever-increasing sense of frustration on all sides of the chamber. Members of all parties do not want what is proposed for the road network, but we have no opportunity to force the minister to delay the process. I appeal to all members to find a way to force the minister to abide by this morning's clearly expressed will of the Parliament.

Twenty months ago, when the elections for this Parliament were held, the people of Scotland voted in the belief that a new political system would allow decision making in Scotland to be conducted in an open, transparent and democratic manner. I believe that that view is endorsed by the vast majority of members but—sadly—the events that surround the awarding of contracts for trunk road maintenance have not been open, transparent or democratic. Instead those events have demonstrated the worst excesses of an episode of "Yes, Minister". Several examples illustrate that.

The January issue of Surveyor magazine said that

"the financial model had skewed the comparison so that prices were distorted and not based on value for money".

As a result of the flaws in the tender process, legal challenges were subsequently mounted against the Government by the council consortium. The latest challenge was rejected on the basis of time, but the petitioners were found to have a prima facie case.

Perhaps it would be helpful to emphasise that each of the four consortia comprised local authorities in partnership with the private sector. Members who have tried to speak about public sector protectionism are quite wrong. The system should protect the public and private sectors and should be designed to get best value for the taxpayer. That will not happen if the minister gets her way.

On Tuesday, the minister awarded the contract, subject to an urgent independent review of one aspect of the assessment process. That same assessment process has been the subject of court action during the past fortnight and has been vigorously defended by Government lawyers in court. If the minister accepts that there is a problem, why did she go ahead and award the contracts? It is a ludicrous situation.

Fergus Ewing: I am grateful that Shona Robison has allowed me to intervene; the minister would not accept an intervention. The review process is being carried out by Halcrow, a company that played a part in the tendering process. How can a company that played a part in the tendering process be given—by the minister—the job of judging its own performance? Is not that absolutely ludicrous?

Shona Robison: I agree totally with Fergus Ewing. I am sure that an awful lot of scandals will come to light during the inquiry by the Transport and the Environment Committee. However, it will be too late—by that point the horse will have bolted.

Sarah Boyack: I say to the member that the consultants have a professional reputation to defend. The people who have been allocated to the review were not involved in the tendering. Such practice is well established and is standard in commercial consultancy organisations. The consultant has in the past made robust recommendations to the Executive, upon which we have subsequently had to act. The review is not a way for the Executive to avoid examining the process closely. The review is independent and will be robust and we will respond to it.

Shona Robison: The minister's defensiveness says a lot. I hope that she continues to dig a hole for herself. The reality is that several hundred local government workers throughout Scotland have had their jobs placed in jeopardy because of the minister's decision.

Significant questions about future provision of services remain unanswered. In a briefing paper, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities says that about 500 full-time equivalent jobs are dependent on the contracts. The loss of those contracts will have a significant impact on the operation of many DLOs, which rely on trunk road maintenance for about 30 per cent of their income. Loss of that income will have an impact on the viability of their whole operations and a consequent impact on the maintenance and repair of the local road network.

Mr Stone: Will the member give way?

Shona Robison: No, I have taken a lot of interventions.

Many DLOs also produce a surplus that they return to the local councils at the end of the year. For example, the three councils in Tayside have budgeted for a surplus of around £1 million from Tayside Contracts. Given the loss of such income, will the Minister for Finance and Local Government give a different settlement to local government? I doubt it.

To sum up, I believe that a lot of questions need to be asked. When the Transport and the Environment Committee has its inquiry, a lot of facts will come out about the process that will prove the points that are being made today. The problem is that that will happen after the horse has bolted.

I appeal to concerned members; let us do something about this and make the minister delay the process. That is the will of the Parliament.

10:12

Tommy Sheridan (Glasgow) (SSP): Shona Robison finished by referring to the will of the Parliament. I appeal to the Presiding Officer to recognise the will of the Parliament and, at least, to give an opportunity to the Parliament to do something about the matter. As the Presiding Officer might know, I have submitted an amendment to the amendment—

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Order, Mr Sheridan. You submitted your amendment after the debate had started. It would be unprecedented, although not impossible, for me to accept it. I have called you early to give you the chance to speak. I think that in your four minutes you should address the issue, rather than procedural matters.

Tommy Sheridan: With the greatest respect, Presiding Officer, I hope that you will accept that—

The Deputy Presiding Officer: You are eating into your time, Mr Sheridan. You have four minutes.

Tommy Sheridan: I appreciate that I am eating into my time. I have been interrupted twice now.

Murray Tosh has presented you with an amendment to the Executive's amendment. There is a built-in disadvantage for smaller parties—

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Mr Sheridan, please come to the point. I gave you a written note, explaining that I would call you to speak early. That is the decent thing to do. I have called you early. If you wish to speak, speak now. The matter is for the judgment of the chair. I will not allow any further procedural discussion.

Tommy Sheridan: I am very sorry, Presiding Officer, but I asked for a deferment of the awarding of the contracts. It was—

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Mr Sheridan, you must speak to the motion, otherwise I will call the next member. That is a final warning.

Tommy Sheridan: Sorry. I hoped that the chamber would force the minister to defer the awarding of contracts.

What we have had today is a very mature and welcome debate. The SNP stands accused of lodging a weak motion. I think that it lodged a weak motion because it hoped to get everybody's support.

I commend Andy Kerr's honesty. It is absolutely refreshing that the member has come here and said what he feels, instead of being gagged, as members often are on serious issues such as this. I commend him on that.

It is undoubtedly the case that the Executive's amendment is stronger because it refers to

"further exploration of all outstanding issues".

What members are asking is, "What does that mean?" Does it mean suspending the awarding of the contracts until there is further exploration? If it does, I hope that we could all support it. If it means investigating all the issues, but awarding the contracts anyway, then it is—to be frank—only talk. That is why I hope that we will get a commitment from the minister today that there will be no awarding of the contracts until full exploration has taken place, in particular by the Parliament's Transport and the Environment Committee.

I commend Mr Kerr, because he has been consistent. Far too often in the life of the Parliament, we have heard members say one thing, particularly in newspapers and on the radio—we will come to that later with the First Minister—but do something else in Parliament. At least the convener of the Transport and the Environment Committee has stuck to his brief in recognising that the process is flawed. The decision, if it is allowed to proceed, is disgraceful. Let us take the decision to suspend the awarding of the contracts until there has been full appraisal of the whole process.

The minister has talked about jobs. I heard her on the radio the other day and she seemed to be dismissive about the threat to 3,500 jobs. She said that the private companies would take over some of the jobs and that TUPE regulations would apply. I refer the minister to the Amey group's statement of its intentions for this year. I quote from its business statement, which says:

"At the beginning of April 2001, Amey will re-structure to focus more closely on the market segments in which it operates. Furthermore, a market-facing structure, supported by . . ."—

I emphasise this—

"a lean but highly efficient Group centre, is designed to reduce operating costs over time."

Mr Stone: Does Mr Sheridan agree that, whatever the figure for potential job losses, the loss of one, two, three or four jobs—as few as that—will have a fatal and devastating effect on rural communities, such as those in the constituency that I represent?

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Answer and close, Mr Sheridan.

Tommy Sheridan: It gives me pleasure to support what Jamie Stone said in his intervention. As we all know, the Amey group statement reveals that the private sector secured the contract on the basis that it would cut costs by cutting jobs. That is what this is about and there is no doubt about that in anybody's mind. Let us not see any crocodile tears. The statement says that employees will be transferred, but they will be transferred to a company that is going to restructure—therefore TUPE will not apply. That is the fact of the matter and the minister must recognise it.

My final point is on safety. We are looking at a gamble with people's safety. Regardless of local criticisms, the performance of DLOs up and down the country in clearing our roads during the winter is absolutely tremendous. That is in danger. Today we are having an Alice-in-Wonderland discussion in which the Tories are on the side of the public sector workers. Perhaps today's debate is not an Alice-in-Wonderland debate but a Sarah-in-Toryland debate.

10:18

Mr David Davidson (North-East Scotland) (Con): I thank the SNP for addressing this subject during its non-Executive time. Every member must have had local correspondence on the matter. As Andy Kerr succinctly put it, the process is flawed.

I commend Murray Tosh's amendment to the Parliament, in particular the final part, which calls for

"an urgent analysis of the impact of disaggregation".

Members should look at those words, because members could support that. I appreciate that the SNP motion is not one of its stronger ones, but it was designed to encourage open and clear debate, without interference from party politics. The matter is important and the Executive and the minister have failed to grasp what the situation is about.

The minister said that current contracts expire in March. Any normal contract process has—always—a safety clause at the end. If something goes wrong, there is a mechanism to continue with the existing contract for the short term. I ask the minister to confirm when she speaks whether such a mechanism exists in this case. If that is the case, we can support Murray Tosh's amendment and get the independent review that is required to examine this flawed process.

I was speechless at the minister's blinkered view of the matter; she does not seem to understand the knock-on effects of what is proposed and that point has been made well enough by other members. It is important that she understands that, unless local government budgets are altered to deal with it, loss of critical mass from a local authority enterprise that maintains roads will lead to rising costs for the council tax payer. If she alters those budgets, where is the saving? It would be far better to consider the submissions that we have received from many council directors, especially from Aberdeenshire Council, which said clearly that the best of the public and private sectors were seeking to put the bids together. I was a councillor in 1995 and I remember some of what Andy Kerr talked about. Under the Conservative Government, we eventually achieved—with support from both sides—a good contracting system, which took account of quality as well as cost. Value for money was important then; it is even more important now.

Mr Stone: Does Mr Davidson agree that in addition to the loss of critical mass—only a rump remains with local authorities—the private sector will cherry-pick the best employees and skills from the local authorities, which will further undermine what is left to the authorities?

Mr Davidson: I do not want to go that far. I am more concerned that the chamber acts sensibly today to prevent the minister taking us into a situation that could bring a potentially disastrous cost to all tax payers and road users in Scotland.

We are not talking about party politics or which side is right. The debate is about the process—that is what the chamber must vote on.

Mr Stone rose—

Mr Davidson: No. Mr Stone has had his five interventions; he has done well.

I do not understand the Executive's approach to responsibility for the roads infrastructure, especially on lifeline projects. In other words, what is a trunk road and therefore the Scottish Executive's responsibility and what roads should be the local authorities' responsibility? I do not understand the Montrose bridge situation—it is apparently a lifeline project, but the road is not trunked, so it is the responsibility of the council. The minister thinks that some other budget will deal with that project. She has said that in her letters to me, but that is not the case. Government departments must talk to each other and consider matters in the round.

In Aberdeenshire, part of which I represent, there are problems with the western bypass. Why is it that the M74 in Glasgow is paid for by the public purse? We all supported that, but we in the north-east are told that it does not matter how economically important the road is to us; Aberdeenshire Council will have to pay for the bypass.

In conclusion, we ask the minister to listen—for once—and to put aside the pettiness that appeared in her earlier speech. We ask her to listen to the strong advice that she has been offered from all parts of the chamber today.

In conclusion, Presiding Officer—

The Deputy Presiding Officer: That is your second conclusion.

Mr Davidson: I ask the chamber to support Murray Tosh's amendment.

10:23

Fiona McLeod (West of Scotland) (SNP): This is not so much a set-piece debate as an emergency debate. I hope that the minister will listen to the pleas that are being made in the chamber.

The minister said that the process was not flawed, but she has heard more than once today that the court made it clear that its judgment was time-barred, but that it accepted the prima facie evidence. Therefore the process was legally flawed.

Members have talked about loss of jobs. Does the minister dispute the local authorities' figures? Does she dispute the figures that her colleagues have quoted today—that there will be 22 job losses in South Ayrshire, 22 in Dumfries and Galloway and 30 jobs lost in the Highlands? All will be directly related to the loss of the contracts.

Is TUPE fully costed in bids from private companies to which the minister is about to award contracts? If it is not—we have heard from several councils that it is not and that not all jobs are covered by TUPE—will extra money be put into local authority budgets to offset the costs of redundancies?

The minister said that the process has been long and that people have had plenty of opportunity to question her. I say to the minister that I have received correspondence from more than one council. That correspondence states that the councils have, throughout, tried to question the process, but they have not been allowed to do so and the door has been slammed in their faces. That is not what a listening Government would do.

I want to finish by saying—in fact I do not want to finish as I have plenty of time and there are plenty of other points that I could make.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The quicker the better.

Fiona McLeod: I apologise.

I will quote from Alison Magee, the COSLA transport spokesman. She wrote to all members, including the Minister for Transport and the First Minister. The letter states:

"on behalf of COSLA I would, again, request most urgently that before any contracts are awarded you undertake an independent and widely defined appraisal of whether the whole process followed will provide best value in delivering road maintenance".

In essence, that is what all members are asking of the minister today. In her summing-up, I want to hear a categorical assurance about the phrase in her amendment that says that the Executive will

"continue further exploration of all outstanding issues."

I want the minister to explain that phrase and to tell us that it means that she will halt the process now and that she will not award the contracts within the next four days, but instead await the Transport and the Environment Committee's inquiry, which will be full, wide-ranging, transparent, open and public. I want an assurance that, when that inquiry is reported to Parliament, the minister will listen and make her decision based on it. If we hear the absolute guarantee today that she will halt the tender process and that she will await the report from that committee's inquiry, as discussed by Parliament, the SNP will support her amendment.

10:27

Kate MacLean (Dundee West) (Lab): Like Andy Kerr, I find the decision that has been taken unbelievable. I spent seven years as a council leader and three years as vice-president of COSLA fighting for public sector jobs and services. I cannot marry that with the decision that has been taken on these contracts.

This is not about the public sector versus the private sector; the council that I was a member of was involved in private finance initiative projects and stock transfers. It is about the fact that there has not been a level playing field. If the differences in prices had occurred under a fair tendering process, I would have accepted that. I would not have been happy about it and its effect on public sector jobs, but I would have accepted it. However, that is not what this is about. It is about a flawed quality assessment process and a flawed financial assessment model. Enough concerns have been raised in the chamber and by outside organisations, in both the private and public sector, that suggest that we should reconsider the matter.

I hope that the minister, even at this late stage, will be able to say that she will delay awarding contracts until the Transport and the Environment Committee has held an inquiry into the matter.

Tayside Contracts, in my constituency, has estimated that it will suffer a 30 per cent loss of income if the minister's proposals go ahead. That will have a knock-on effect for the local authorities that are involved, which last year had £1.2 million in profits returned to them by Tayside Contracts. That money must be found elsewhere, either by increasing council tax or through cuts in services in the local authority. That is not acceptable. I might not have been happy about the situation if I had been confident that the process was fair, but I am certainly not happy about it in the current circumstances.

The audit—to which the minister referred in an answer to a written question—that she expects will take fewer than seven days is a fig leaf. PricewaterhouseCoopers and Halcrow are involved in the performance audit group, but they were involved in the early stages of assessing the tenders, so they cannot be described as independent.

Although I agree with the SNP and the Tories on those issues, I must say that the SNP has been disingenuous. If we support the SNP motion, we will be supporting less than the Executive amendment. The SNP has tried to give the impression that supporting its motion will somehow stop the process.

Fiona McLeod: Will the member give way?

Kate MacLean: No. I am not taking any interventions because SNP members did not take any.

The SNP has been very disingenuous; if we support its motion, nothing will happen. Furthermore, the Tories are simply being opportunistic. They say that they want efficiency and value for money; however, it was the Tories who introduced compulsory competitive tendering, which meant that councils had to make an expensive and inefficient split between client and contractor.

I urge the minister to consider seriously the feelings of MSPs and of both public and private outside organisations.

10:30

Euan Robson (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD): We have already heard about the short consultation period on the document "The Road Ahead: A Review of the Management and Maintenance Arrangements for Scottish Trunk Roads". How many of the 60-plus responses favoured the four areas conclusion that was reached? That is the root cause of today's debacle.

Will the minister clarify why the base formula was issued only after the tendering process was completed? Why are some of the base costs eight times the historic reality? That has made it inevitable that the public and private sector consortia would lose out.

The idea of saving centrally simply to spend extra money at local government level is ludicrous and creates a severe problem. It is estimated that 37 jobs will be lost in the Scottish Borders, with major disruption to integrated winter and maintenance services on the A68 and the A7. Part of the problem is that the development department views trunk roads as motorways. In rural locations, however, a trunk road can be single carriageway. The episode has brought us to the point where we must consider a major programme of detrunking and ring-fencing resources to allow local authorities to deal with roads, particularly of the type that I have mentioned.

The Executive spent much time and effort trying to change the atmosphere of the relationship between central and local government, particularly through the recent local government settlement. That was welcome and much good work was done and good will created. However, the deep sadness of this episode is that it has soured that new atmosphere and breached the developing trust between central and local government. I conclude that the situation represents a major failure of public policy.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Thank you for your brevity. Can we have similar brevity from Alex Neil?

10:33

Alex Neil (Central Scotland) (SNP): Thank you, Presiding Officer, for letting me in.

I pay tribute to Andy Kerr's speech. It takes courage—particularly on some benches—to make that kind of speech, and I do not understand how the minister, who heard his devastating analysis, can continue to hold her position.

Yesterday, we witnessed Labour's betrayal of old people with Alzheimer's and dementia. Today, we have its betrayal of council workers throughout Scotland. If the Executive is allowed to get away with that, tomorrow it will be the betrayal of the water workers and others.

My first remarks are addressed not to the minister, but to the members of Unison and the other unions who are in the gallery today. I welcome them to the chamber. I point out, however, that it is not enough just to protest outside it. Many Unison members pay a political levy to the Labour party. Why should they pay a levy to an organisation that is destroying their jobs, their futures and their families? It is time that those workers had a weapon with which to give Labour a taste of its own medicine.

Mr Tosh: Will the member give way?

Alex Neil: I do not have time to take interventions, even from someone as articulate as Murray Tosh.

In answer to Kate MacLean's point on the SNP motion, I say that when we submitted the motion we did not know about the Transport and the Environment Committee's inquiry.

No one can hide behind European Union rules on competition; nothing in those rules says that we need this shabby process—quite the opposite.

Finally, how can a minister stand up and say that the proposal represents value for money when she has not costed the redundancy payments, the unemployment benefits, the effects on local authority finance and all the rest of it? It is amateurish and pathetic to argue that a lower price means value for money. Value for money is not just about the price of contracts, but about the wider question of the impact of this shabby deal on Scotland. I beg the minister to put a stop to this nonsense and start the process all over again.

10:36

Donald Gorrie (Central Scotland) (LD): I thank Andy Kerr and Kate MacLean for reviving my faith in the Parliament; I invite the minister to revive my faith in the Government.

As the technical aspects of the issue have been well covered by people who know more about them than I do, I will stick to two points: first, the partnership between the Parliament and the Executive and local government; and secondly, the issue of democracy within the Parliament.

The relationship between the Parliament and, particularly, the Executive and local government was at a low ebb because the previous local government financial settlement was unsatisfactory. I am not blaming anyone for that situation; however, it represented a shrewd blow against local government. Since then, ministers, supporters of the Executive in the Labour and Liberal Democrat parties and members of the Opposition have been working very hard to forge a better relationship with local government. However, although relationships were improving after a better financial settlement, this action will put us back where we were—and perhaps in an even worse position. We must work at this very important partnership. With respect to the minister, the documents produced on behalf of her department which rubbish the views of local government are an absolute disgrace.

In my experience, ministers are decent people captured by civil servants—and I should make it clear that that is not a party political point; I have seen the same thing happen to members of all parties. Instead of listening to the public and their political colleagues, ministers end up believing, on the advice of civil servants and lawyers, that they cannot do anything at all. The partnership between central and local government must be repaired.

My second point is also relevant to the next debate. We have a minister who quite genuinely holds particular views and has pursued a particular policy. It is clear, however, that a massive majority in the Parliament wants a different policy. I do not think that the minister has a single friend in the chamber for the policy that she is conscientiously pursuing. In any democracy, there must be some recognition of that problem, and the Parliament has yet to work out how to deal with it.

Although we do not want crises, votes of no confidence and so on, it is not acceptable for a minister to ignore the majority opinion of the Parliament. As a result, I appeal to the minister to pursue the course advocated by my colleague Iain Smith and other members. There must be a delay in putting the contracts into effect while the whole position is properly scrutinised. Furthermore, we must examine the system's fairness, which has been heavily criticised. If we do not have such a delay or review, many of us will seriously address the state of democracy in the Parliament.

10:40

Phil Gallie (South of Scotland) (Con): I sympathise with the minister. I cannot remember another debate in the Scottish Parliament—or at Westminster—in which a minister has stood entirely alone, with not one member from the back benches to support her. I sympathise with her because no other member of the Scottish Executive is here to support her. Rhona Brankin made a brief appearance during the debate, but she has since disappeared. That absence of support is an absolute disgrace, and it perhaps demonstrates the weakness of the argument that the minister is obliged to put forward.

Conservatives cannot be accused of hypocrisy on the issue. We do not regard the argument as about the qualities of the private sector or of local government. Members have referred to the partnerships that existed in the DLOs and the private sector and to the recent contracts that have been successfully fulfilled. Our argument concerns the quality of the tendering process and the questions that arise from it. Andy Kerr referred to the tendering process as a shambles. He and I do not often agree on political measures, but we agree on issues such as contracts, of which we both have some experience. The tendering process has, indeed, been a shambles.

It is not only those who have been involved in contract procedures who feel that way. A QC who defended the Executive's cause in court recognised that the tendering process was flawed, and learned judges condemned aspects of it. That suggests that something is wrong.

Mr Stone: So far, every member has supported the notion of delaying the contracts. Is that the Conservative party's position?

Phil Gallie: It certainly is our position. Murray Tosh lodged his amendment after the minister lodged an amendment that called on the Executive

"to continue further exploration of all outstanding issues."

Fiona McLeod referred to that request, emphasising a way forward for the minister on that statement. She saw it as an opportunity for the minister to step back, delay and think again. I believe that every member would plead with the minister to think again.

10:43

Sarah Boyack: The comments made this morning demonstrate the value of conducting some of the discussion in public. The past few weeks have been extremely difficult. Before a decision was reached, and until the matter had gone through the courts, it was not possible for me to enter into a public debate. I am grateful that I can begin to answer members' questions. A critical reason for the Executive's amendment S1M-1584.1 is to allow me to answer the detailed questions that members have asked.

Members have put questions of detail and of principle to me over the past few weeks, and I deeply regret that I have not been able to answer them. In my response to the debate, I will cover as many points as I can. If I am unable to address specific points that members have raised, I will ensure that those members receive an individual reply, as they deserve nothing less. We will also have the opportunity to debate the matter further, which is the essence of the last line of the Executive amendment S1M-1584.1.

Phil Gallie: Will the minister give way?

Sarah Boyack: I cannot possibly give way before I get to my final comments.

Euan Robson talked about base quantities, which ties in with the court case. Let us be clear. It is the Executive's view that the courts ruled that the three-council consortium had not established a prima facie case on the issues raised. The only exception was in relation to the base quantities applied in the tender process, on which the court said that there might be arguments to hear. The court also said that the Scottish ministers might have a good argument on the issues raised by the consortium, which made no difference to the validity of the process.

As a minister, I needed to test the point about base quantities properly, by independent audit, before I could sign contracts. I would love to live in a world without lawyers. For the past five to six weeks, the Scottish ministers have explored every legal opportunity available and we will consider those issues further.

Quality has been assured throughout the tendering process. Only those who were assessed as capable of delivering quality were shortlisted. The specifications were of the same standard or higher than those in the current contracts and ran to two volumes. Tenderers were allowed to explain their proposals and submit them prior to tenders being submitted, so that we could highlight any shortcomings before their final submission. At the core of the contracts is the intention to ensure that there is no reduction in levels of safety. The winning contractors will have to demonstrate a track record on trunk road safety in England and on the M74 in Scotland.

Mr Kerr: Will the minister provide information on that point?

Sarah Boyack: No. I must respond to questions that have been raised already.

David Davidson asked a question that I have also been asked outside the chamber, concerning the extension of local authority contracts: what opportunity do I have to do that? The majority of the contracts have no facility for extension beyond 1 April. Because of their value, they are subject to the European procurement rules that regulate the way in which the Scottish Executive may act. To extend the current local authority contracts would almost certainly be regarded, under those procurement rules, as awarding a new contract without competition. It would therefore be a breach of European rules—

Mr Stone: That is nonsense.

Sarah Boyack: That is the advice that I have been given. I would love to live in a world without laws. However, the Parliament must operate within our law and within European law.

Murray Tosh made a point about consultation. I am not saying that everyone agreed with the tendering process, but, in responding to the consultation document "The Road Ahead", 15 local authorities said that they favoured the use of operating companies in some form. Although they would have preferred contracts to have been given to the companies without competition, that would not be possible under European rules.

I shall now address the motion and the amendments. The SNP motion condemns the Scottish Executive for failing to keep people informed. My opportunities to talk openly to people over the past few weeks have been limited. The Executive was involved in court action in the new year, during which proceedings it was impossible for me to comment. Several MSPs have written to me and the First Minister has written to COSLA, and we will ensure that that correspondence is dealt with properly.

The Tory amendment is breathtakingly hypocritical. I strongly agreed with the comments of Kate MacLean and Andy Kerr on that point. It was the Tories who broke the long-standing agency agreements with local authorities by putting out to tender the contracts that the local authorities won in 1996.

Mr Tosh: Will the minister give way?

Sarah Boyack: No, thank you.

The Conservative amendment seems to suggest that there is a unified structure, but there is not, and that is at the heart of the matter. The fragmentation of the approach to roads maintenance was begun by the Tories' abolition of the regional councils. The consultation paper issued in 1999 was intended to gather experiences in the aftermath of reorganisation and to establish a more rational and coherent approach to the maintenance of vital trunk roads and motorways throughout Scotland.

Mr Tosh: Will the minister give way?

Sarah Boyack: No, thank you. I will not take lessons from the Tories, given their track record on running down Scottish roads maintenance and decades of underinvestment in infrastructure. I am surprised that the Tories have even entered the debate today.

Let me respond to the comments that were made by Andy Kerr and Kate MacLean. The Executive amendment goes further than the SNP motion, and I give the commitment that I shall continue to explore the options that are open to the Executive. We have considered our options over the past five weeks and we will continue to do so.

Mr Tosh: Will the minister give way on that point?

Sarah Boyack: No, I will not. I have given a commitment on the audit. If there are other issues that I can consider beyond the debate, I shall do so.

Tommy Sheridan: Will the minister suspend the awarding of the contracts?

Sarah Boyack: I have already delayed the signing of the contracts to ensure that we properly address the base quantities audit and that that information is available to Scottish ministers before we take the final step: that is important. We are exploring the opportunities and have been doing so for the past five weeks.

I recognise that the debate has been difficult for everybody. This has been the first opportunity to debate the issue in the chamber. I will respond in writing to those comments to which I have not been able to respond in my final remarks. I am conscious that I am running out of time, but I have tried to respond to all comments.

Tommy Sheridan: On a point of order. In the interests of democracy in the chamber, the minister should address the question that all sides have put. Will the minister defer the signing of the contracts? Members want to know.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: That is not a point of order.

10:51

Mr Kenneth Gibson (Glasgow) (SNP): We have seen a fairly astonishing turn of events. I do not think that I have ever been at a debate in which a minister has spoken twice and, after sitting down, has received applause from not one member on either occasion. That shows the chamber's concern and unanimity on the issue, which has caused great concern for a number of people over a long period. I am pleased that we have been able to bring it before the chamber.

I will address the comments made by each speaker. First, the minister has not answered the central question. I am willing to sit down and allow her to intervene if she will say whether she will delay the contracts until such time as the Transport and the Environment Committee has carried out its investigations. [MEMBERS: "Go on, Minister."] Given that the minister has not intervened, I shall proceed.

The tendering process was flawed at 26 different points. In the main, those have been touched upon, but they deserve further comment. How could the assessment process, for example, have been carried out effectively if the current providers—with decades of experience, who have delivered a high-quality service—are replaced by two companies, one of which has little or no experience in Scotland? The tendering process has lacked any transparency. The Government reserved the right to apply unspecified weightings to items within the bid, but the actual weightings applied have never been disclosed.

On quality, tenderers did not know what the quality threshold was. They were advised only if they reached it.

On pricing, tenderers will be paid a lump sum for winter maintenance, irrespective of the type of winter. There is great concern over the flexibility of such pricing.

On price assessment, some of the quantities used in the assessment are three or four times greater than have been or will be used by the Government. In one instance, a differential of over 4,000 per cent has been indicated. That has greatly distorted tender prices. It was made clear at pre-tender and quality meetings that large lump sums and low rates would not be tolerated, yet it appears that they have been accepted. That makes it easier to manipulate outcomes. In addition, the many areas of ambiguity in the tender documents mean that there is considerable scope for claims for additional costs, possibly leading to an expensive claims approach by tenderers using that methodology. Bruce Crawford talked about the serious damage to our ability to manage and maintain our roads and about the fact that no attempt was made to assess the impact on existing services. Like other members, he talked about duplication, and increased costs for local depots and quarries.

The minister spoke after Bruce Crawford and talked about the use of inaccurate information, but it seems to me that the minister is the only person who holds to that view. COSLA and the individual local authorities have all submitted information that contradicts the minister. It appears that the minister believes that she is right and that everyone else is wrong. How can that possibly be? She has approached the debate like an ostrich with its head stuck firmly in the sand.

Murray Tosh talked about savings being made centrally by burdening local authorities. He was not satisfied that the process had been carried out effectively.

Iain Smith talked about the lack of transparency and clarity in the process. He touched on the errors in base quantities and talked about economies of scale, about depots closing and about materials. He also called for a full, independent assessment.

Everyone in the chamber would agree that today's keynote speech was given with great passion by Andy Kerr. He expressed no faith in the minister's judgment—what can we add to that? He talked about a shambles of a process and reminded the minister that local authorities are already in partnership with the private sector and that we were hoping to achieve a level playing field.

Andy Kerr doubted that local authorities had been listened to and talked of this being a sad day for the Scottish Parliament. He said that quality was not in the contracts and pointed out the fact that the Scottish Government's proposals were 10 years out of date and were simply compulsory competitive tendering mark I. He told us that there was not even a basic level of best value in the contracts.

Shona Robison talked about the conflict of interest with Halcrow and I have been advised by some of the many lawyers on the SNP benches that that could leave the Scottish Government open to independent legal challenge if the contracts were introduced. Shona Robison appealed to members to support the SNP motion.

Tommy Sheridan talked about the honesty of Andy Kerr's presentation and called for a full exploration of the matter. He emphasised the fact that the minister was proposing to cut costs by cutting jobs and mentioned the possible risks to safety. David Davidson talked about the minister's blinkered view and, although he did not use these exact words, said that the minister was taking us over the abyss on the issue.

Fiona McLeod again pointed out that the minister had disputed the information given by local councils. She quoted COSLA on its adamant opposition to the proposals that the minister has outlined today. I would like to quote David Stewart, the Labour MP for Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber. He says:

"I have very grave doubts about the Executive's handling of the tendering process. It has been deeply flawed from the outset, and I have no hesitation in supporting the Highland Council's stance. In politics, you have to stand up for what you believe is right."

Kate MacLean also talked about flaws in the assessment process and said that the Executive had let the side down.

Alex Neil talked about the amateurish and pathetic argument that the minister had put forward and I am sure that most MSPs will agree with the point that he made about shabby deals.

Donald Gorrie raised an important point about the minister undermining trust between the Scottish Parliament and the ministers and talked about the need for the ministerial team to listen to the majority.

There was discussion of the fact that the minister is entirely alone in the process and the minister refused to reply to individual concerns that were raised by members. It appears that, in her view, her civil servants are right but that MSPs, COSLA, local authorities, Uncle Tom Cobbleigh and all are wrong. She even had the temerity to misquote the SNP's motion.

Pauline McNeill (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab): And the SNP never does that.

Mr Gibson: Nasty.

Best value has been totally ignored and TUPE regulations will be ignored. It is clear that substantial numbers of people will not meet the criteria for TUPE regulations and that local authorities will be faced with redundancy costs. TUPE regulations will apply only in cases in which half of the work of a member of staff is clearly identified with the transferred undertaking. That is unlikely to apply to many due to the way in which direct labour organisations use staff across differing contracts.

The minister may have called for an urgent independent review of one aspect of the tendering process, but one can hardly feel confident of the outcome, given the fact that, in yesterday's Evening Times, the minister was quoted as saying that she is certain that the findings will not alter her decision. The issue is about jobs, services, people and livelihoods. It is not about a minister behaving like King Canute and holding back the waves of indignation and concern. She should re-examine all aspects of a flawed process to arrive at the best possible solution and to find the most economically advantageous method of delivering trunk road management and maintenance.

I urge members to support the motion.

Bruce Crawford: On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I seek your guidance. When we lodged our motion, we did not know—formally—whether the Transport and the Environment Committee would review the whole tendering process; nor did we know whether the Minister for Transport would sign the contracts between the time of our lodging the motion and today's debate. We have a problem, and we need your help and guidance. I implore you to find a way that will allow the Parliament to express its wish that we delay the process and re-examine the tendering through the Transport and the Environment Committee. It is obvious that the chamber shares that view. We must find a way to reach a conclusion. What methods are available under standing orders to allow us to do that?

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Patricia Ferguson): It is always open to members to draft motions including such information. That opportunity was open to you, Mr Crawford.

Bruce Crawford: Was it?

Tommy Sheridan: On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Let me continue please, if you do not mind, Mr Sheridan. There are opportunities for members to produce amendments to motions at fairly late notice, but it is always our intention to be able to give members as much notice as we possibly can of amendments. That is why, this morning, we, unfortunately, had to rule out Mr Sheridan's amendment.

Tommy Sheridan rose—

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Is this another point of order, or is it on the same point?

Tommy Sheridan: It is on the same point: can you clarify the system that you are operating for amending amendments? Every member of all parties will agree that most of us find out about amendments to motions when we receive our business bulletins. As soon as I got mine, I read the Tories' amendment to the Executive's amendment. I wished also to lodge an amendment that summed up the will of everyone here. It was only a few words—to defer the signing of the contracts until the Transport and the Environment Committee had explored the matter.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: What I said earlier to Mr Crawford stands, but I would add that it is open to a member who so wishes to check with the chamber office to find out whether amendments have been lodged. The chamber office will co-operate with members to ensure that that process flows as smoothly as possible.

Personal Care for the Elderly

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Patricia Ferguson): The next item of business is a Scottish National Party debate on motion S1M-1589, in the name of Mr John Swinney, on personal care for the elderly. There are two amendments to the motion. One of the amendments appears in the business bulletin. Copies of the second amendment are available at the back of the chamber, in the usual place.

11:02

Nicola Sturgeon (Glasgow) (SNP): In opening today's debate, I acknowledge that our motion was, to all intents and purposes, drafted by the Liberal Democrats. The SNP lodged it for debate in our Opposition time in order to give the Parliament an early opportunity to express its will on a matter of great importance to thousands of elderly people and their families throughout Scotland.

The debate has been prompted by something that the Government has not done. However, before I discuss that, I will first take a few moments to acknowledge what the Government has done. All members welcomed Susan Deacon's announcements on 5 October and yesterday that there would be more money for aids and adaptations and for better home care, a focus on bedblocking and a single needs assessment. All those commitments will make a positive difference to the lives of many elderly people in Scotland.

Let me make one thing absolutely clear. It is not the case—as the Government has implied time and again and as a certain London peer has said—that we face a choice between the initiatives that the Government has already announced and full implementation of the Sutherland commission's recommendations. This is not an either/or question. The payment of personal care costs for all elderly people in Scotland is an essential part of any package to make the system of long-term care fair and to improve the quality of life for all those who require long-term care.

The reason why we are debating the motion is that a majority of MSPs—I believe—and of the Scottish public think that the Executive has not gone as far as it should have gone, could have gone and was expected to go. I will deal with the "should" and the "could" later. Amid the claims and counter-claims about what full implementation of the Sutherland report will mean, it is important to restate clearly the simple but overwhelming case that personal care costs should be paid from general taxation.

First, I will deal with the matter of expectations. The reason why the reaction to yesterday's statement—which, given its content, or rather lack of content, was always going to lead to deep disappointment—turned to fury was that the Government, and the First Minister in particular, had over the past three months misled the people of Scotland. In the words of Maureen O'Neill of Age Concern Scotland, as reported in this morning's press,

"expectations were raised over the past eight weeks only to be dashed"

by the Minister for Health and Community Care yesterday. That is putting it mildly.

However hard Henry McLeish tries to rewrite recent history, the fact remains that he led Scotland to believe that Sutherland would be implemented in full. At the very least, that was how everyone in Scotland interpreted his remarks. The crucial point is that at no time did he or anyone acting on his behalf challenge that interpretation. He was happy to let Scotland believe that he was about to do right by Scotland's pensioners. He then allowed himself to be dictated to by his colleagues in London, letting Scotland down in the process.

I hope that, if nothing else, Henry McLeish pledges never again to play politics with an issue that is so important to so many people. It is no accident that the majority of people in Scotland—including MSPs, voluntary organisations, elderly forums, the general public, Malcolm Chisholm and, at least until last week, Henry McLeish—support Sir Stewart Sutherland's recommendations. They do so because Sir Stewart and his commission were right.

Long-term care for the elderly involves a range of complex issues—on that point, the Government is right. That is presumably why the Royal Commission on Long Term Care was established in the first place and why it was given a year to examine the issues and to come up with its recommendations.

Its conclusion was absolutely clear—it is wrong to charge people for personal care. I can put it no better than the Sutherland report did. The commission accepted that people should, where possible, make a contribution to living costs, but it stated:

"The costs of personal care as such are however quite different. These are the costs which, unpredictably and through no fault of their own, old people have to incur when unfortunately they can no longer be looked after at home or cannot be sent home after hospital treatment. They reflect the true risk and 'catastrophic' nature of needing long-term care. In our judgement it is right for the state to exempt personal care from means-testing altogether. This is our key recommendation."

In other words, the Sutherland commission was saying, loudly and clearly, that it is wrong to ask people to pay for help with washing, dressing and going to the toilet. That is help that nobody wants to have to ask for, but that many people are forced to rely on, simply because they are old.

We do not now need review after review to consider the principle of the issue when the principle has already been established clearly and convincingly by the Sutherland commission. What we need now is an acceptance of that principle by the Government. Incidentally, that acceptance is contained nowhere in the amendment lodged by Richard Simpson. We need a commitment to full implementation of Sutherland and a detailed timetable for implementation. That is what the people of Scotland want and deserve.

Let me deal with the arguments that have been made against full implementation, starting with the assertion that to pay personal care costs for all elderly people is to target scarce resources at wealthy pensioners. Let me make it absolutely clear that we are not, in the main, discussing wealthy pensioners; we are talking about people who belong to a thrifty generation and who have managed to save a little, or people whose only asset is the family home. We are talking not about wealthy pensioners but about ordinary pensioners, who have contributed to society for their entire lives and deserve support in their old age.

Even to advance the argument about wealthy pensioners benefiting from full implementation is to miss the whole point of the Sutherland report. The point of the Sutherland recommendation is that it is the very nature of personal care, and the fact that it is such a lottery which of us will require it, that makes payment from taxation the only equitable way of resourcing it.

Secondly, there is the argument that we cannot afford to pay for personal care. The only figures that have been presented in the debate are those of the Sutherland report and those of Sir Stewart himself. The report concluded that implementing its recommendation would, by the middle of the century, add 0.4 per cent to the amount of tax revenues spent on long-term care. To my knowledge, that figure has never been seriously challenged.

The report costs implementation of its recommendation at £110 million per annum. However, as Sir Stewart has said, that is already an historical estimate because it takes no account of other commitments that the Government has made, such as to the provision of free nursing care. According to Sir Stewart, the gap between where the Executive was on Tuesday and where people want it to go is £25 million—again, that figure has never been convincingly challenged. Presumably, that gap has narrowed further since Susan Deacon's announcement yesterday.

So, is implementation affordable? The First Minister seemed to think so on 15 January, when he asked in The Scotsman:

"Is anyone really suggesting that with the teachers and with Sutherland, that is money that cannot be made available out of our budget?"

Is anyone in the Government suggesting that we cannot afford to pay for personal care? I await the minister's answer. It is abundantly clear that until last week it was the First Minister's view that paying for the personal care costs of the most vulnerable people in our society was not only a priority for the Government but a policy that could be afforded.

This is not about affordability. It is an issue of political will, and today it is an issue about the will of the Parliament. There is majority support in Scotland for implementing the Sutherland recommendation and I believe that that majority is reflected in the Parliament. It includes, if they are honest, Malcolm Chisholm and Henry McLeish. Today is our chance to assert our authority as the elected representatives of the people of Scotland and say clearly to the Scottish Government that the Government is the creature of the Parliament, and not vice versa. I hope that MSPs of all parties will support the motion so that, together as members of the Parliament of Scotland, we resolve to do what is right for the pensioners of our country.

I move,

That the Parliament, while welcoming the further package of proposals to improve care for the elderly announced by the Minister for Health and Community Care on 24 January 2001, notes that it is the policy of the Liberal Democrats, SNP, Conservatives and others to introduce free personal care for the elderly as proposed in the Sutherland Commission Report and calls upon the Scottish Executive to make a similar clear, firm and unequivocal commitment together with a definite timetable for its implementation.

Mr Mike Rumbles (West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine) (LD): On a point of order, Presiding Officer. At the beginning of the debate, you said—the Official Report will confirm this—that there was an Executive amendment, copies of which were available at the back of the chamber. It turns out that that amendment is in the name of Richard Simpson. Will you make it clear for the Official Report that the amendments are in the names of Richard Simpson and Tommy Sheridan, neither of whom are yet in the Executive?

The Deputy Presiding Officer: You are misquoting me, Mr Rumbles. I did not mention the word "Executive".

Tommy Sheridan (Glasgow) (SSP): On a point of order, Presiding Officer. What amendments have you accepted?

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I have accepted two amendments: one in your name, Mr Sheridan, and one in the name of Dr Richard Simpson.

11:13

Dr Richard Simpson (Ochil) (Lab): I begin by declaring that I am a director of a nursing home, although it operates in England and will not benefit from any action that is taken by the Executive.

The time has come for a mature debate on the care of elder citizens. Yesterday, according to Alzheimer Scotland—Action on Dementia, there was a major breakthrough. Why did that organisation use that term against the cacophony of soundbites from the SNP and the Tories? It did so because it recognises the reality of the future.

There has been a major breakthrough because we have radically challenged the basis of the debate. No longer will any elderly person or their carer have to decide whether the type of care that they receive is nursing care or personal care. That sterile debate is over. Now we have a Scottish solution to the problem. We have a care needs assessment system that will ensure that many more people will now receive the help that they need.

The discrimination against people with dementia, mental illness or learning disability, which was inherent in the concept of free nursing care, is over. The Parliament should now concentrate on the definition of personal living expenses. Not even Sutherland has ever suggested that those expenses should be anything other than a personal responsibility that is met through personal income, pension or benefits. No matter where people live—in a nursing or residential care home, or at home—they will have to meet their personal living expenses, assessed under the benefits system.

Ms Margo MacDonald (Lothians) (SNP): Will the member give way?

Dr Simpson: No.

The Parliament must recognise that even people in national health service units make a contribution to their personal living expenses, through the stopping of pensions above £15 per week after they have been in NHS units for six weeks.

Yesterday, the Labour-led coalition made it clear that we have begun a journey towards the renationalisation of health care, which the Tories privatised.

Kay Ullrich (West of Scotland) (SNP): Will the member give way?

Dr Simpson: No, I am sorry. The changes that have been announced represent a decisive break with the rest of the UK. Does the Opposition welcome that? No.

Nicola Sturgeon: Yes, we do.

Dr Simpson: The SNP does not welcome the break.

The long-term care bill will offer an opportunity for the Parliament to hold a rational discussion about how we create sustainable funding for the long-term care of the growing number of elderly people who need it.

Ms MacDonald: I accept most of what Dr Simpson has said. Does he accept that the responsibility of the person being cared for to meet the costs of that care, commensurate with their means, can be operated through a system of income tax and a universal benefits system?

Dr Simpson: We have to decide and define where personal responsibility ends and the state's responsibility begins. I do not object to debating that matter on the basis of Sutherland, but we have to define that boundary on a sustainable basis, as the demographic pressures on the Parliament's budget will be substantial. The Parliament has an opportunity through the implementation group and the long-term care bill to define reasonable and sustainable boundaries between personal costs and the state's costs.

Instead of acting rationally and reasonably, the Opposition and—I regret to say—some of our coalition partners want soundbites. Rationally, if I were in opposition and had heard the Executive state yesterday that the end of the journey on which we had begun was free personal care, I would immediately have asked what constituted the free personal care that had just been agreed to and where the line would now be drawn. There will always be boundaries between what is personal responsibility and the responsibility of the state.

Alex Neil (Central Scotland) (SNP): Will the member give way?

Dr Simpson: I am sorry; I am in my last 60 seconds.

I tell our partners that, notwithstanding the efforts of the Tories and the SNP, whose sole purpose is to wreck the coalition—[Interruption.]

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Order.

Dr Simpson: The SNP's profligate promises to the Parliament amount to more than £5 billion. The SNP would wreck our budget and economy.

I appeal to our Liberal colleagues to join us. We believe, as they do, that we should move towards the restoration of the state's responsibility for the care needs of older people, but we recognise that this is a coalition and that Labour has a commitment to those in greatest need. We have commitments, which we will not abandon, to central heating for the elderly, social inclusion and the extension of respite care to support our carers.

There is no dispute about what we want. Margaret Smith and Keith Raffan know the extent of my commitment to the goals that we share. I appeal to the Liberal Democrats to move beyond the rhetoric and ensure that the path that we are on leads to a common goal. I call on them to join us and not pander to the Opposition, whose sole purpose is to wreck the coalition. They should accept the responsibilities and disciplines of government and support the amendment.

I move amendment S1M-1589.2, to leave out from ", while" to end and insert:

"recognises that there are benefits in providing free personal care for the elderly; welcomes as a major step in this direction the further package of proposals announced by the Executive on 24 January 2001 which set out a process that will lead to a substantial extension of free personal care; notes that there are significant issues of cost and practicality in moving further and calls upon the Executive to broaden the terms of reference of the Development Group to require it to consider the practicalities, costs and implications of providing free personal care for all and to report by August 2001 with proposals that will inform the Executive's expenditure decisions for 2002-03 and beyond."

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I should explain to the chamber that I will now call Mr Sheridan, who will formally move his amendment. He will speak during the wind-up speeches at the end of the debate.

Tommy Sheridan: I move amendment S1M-1589.1, to leave out "and others" and insert:

"the Scottish Socialist Party and the Scottish Green Party".

11:20

The Minister for Health and Community Care (Susan Deacon): I am glad that we are having this debate, as it is right and proper that, once and for all, we decide on some of the issues that are at the core of the challenges that we face in delivering better and fairer care for older people in Scotland. I want a better and fairer care system—I think that all of us want that. We want greater equity and higher quality and we want more and better services. The challenge for Government is how to deliver that care to people.

Already, this Executive has made clear our commitment to Scotland's older people, not only in words but in deeds. Last October, we announced a massive investment package of £100 million a year. That is the biggest ever investment in older people's community care services in Scotland—real measures and real investment to deliver better and fairer services throughout our country.

Alongside that investment, we have provided concessionary fares and warmer homes for older people, again backed by investment, action, changes to the organisation and to the design of services and, where necessary, legislative change. Those actions will benefit tens of thousands of Scotland's older people.

Mr Rumbles: Will the minister give way?

Susan Deacon: I thought that those of us who supported the creation of the Parliament spent so long arguing for it in order to make a difference to the lives of the Scottish people.

I will take a quick intervention from Mr Rumbles.

Mr Rumbles: I respect the minister's comment that we want a fairer system for the delivery of personal care. However, we do not want people to fall through the net because their assessment is wrong. For example, on the income supplement, people fall through the net of the minimum income guarantee. That is the point.

Susan Deacon: I have only a few minutes, but I will deal with Mike Rumbles's point. I do not want people to fall through the net. I do not want to make promises to people if I am unable to say when and how those promises can be delivered. I do not want to tell someone that they will receive free personal care if I cannot have the confidence to say that the services are in place to deliver that care. I do not want to tell people that they are going to have free personal care if I cannot say when or how they will receive that care. I do not want to say to people that they will receive free personal care if the consequence of that promise is that other services may ultimately need to be cut. In the Health and Community Care Committee's report of its year-long inquiry into community care, the committee said:

"Clearly the decision to make personal care available free of charge means money is no longer there to be spent on other aspects of community care".

Yesterday, I said that we were determined to create greater fairness and greater equity in the care system. We are ensuring that everyone, universally, will get free nursing care. As I said yesterday, we are pushing out the boundaries and extending the provision of free nursing and personal care to those in greatest need, in order to ensure that some of the greatest inequities in our care system, which affect people with conditions such as dementia and Alzheimer's disease, are addressed once and for all. Those measures will create greater fairness—they are not hollow words, empty rhetoric or promises that cannot be fulfilled. They are real measures that will make a difference to the people of Scotland.

Even the SNP spokesperson said today that she welcomes everything that the Executive has done to date. No one has advocated that we are doing anything that should not be done. No one has said that we should not make progress on the community care agenda. We want to make progress on that agenda. That is why we set out clearly yesterday that care of the elderly would be a top priority for additional investment and why we said that we wanted to examine all the issues involved in extending the boundaries of free care and in improving long-term care.

We will examine the relationship between care and the benefits system. We will examine funding flows through all the other funding streams that come into community care. Malcolm Chisholm's group will advance that work over the next six months and that fixed time scale will feed into our legislative programme. We want to ask the questions and we want to come up with the answers. We want to base our policy and investment decisions on facts, not rhetoric.

If we promise change and improvements for older people in Scotland, we will deliver change and improvements for older people in Scotland. We will say when we will do it and how we can do it. We will explain the consequences of making changes and we will ensure that we deliver change. That is the Executive's commitment; the measures that I set out yesterday demonstrate how that commitment will be met. It is a pity that, on an issue on which we share so many objectives, we now dance on the head of a pin of words, when we all want to deliver change.

11:25

Mary Scanlon (Highlands and Islands) (Con): The Conservatives welcome both the debate and any move that would benefit the care of the elderly. We also look forward to the Health and Community Care Committee's debate in the chamber in February. Today is an opportunity for all MSPs who are committed to personal care for the elderly to vote for it.

Not only is the Executive's response to the Sutherland report disgraceful, but the Minister for Health and Community Care's response to the Health and Community Care Committee's report is overrun by references to the joint future group, which she set up. It is clear that she responded in that way in order to state the Executive's case and to overshadow the committee's report with her ideas. I find it galling that other ministers are able to work effectively with their subject committees, while the Minister for Health and Community Care continually drives a wedge into what could be an excellent working partnership.

I will examine the background to the debate. In 1997, the Royal Commission on Long Term Care was set up. The Sutherland report was published about 18 months later. We are now two years down the line from the Sutherland recommendations. We believed that Labour could not procrastinate any longer with focus groups, strategies, commissions, reviews and working groups, but what do we get? A development group.

If the minister wants to hear a soundbite, I will give her one from Alzheimer Scotland, which said:

"the Development Group is a stalling device."

The reason for the additional delay centres on the definition of personal care, which is set out clearly at chapter 6, page 68 of the Sutherland report. The report says that personal care

"falls within the internationally recognised definition of nursing, but may be delivered by many people who are not nurses"

and should be based on assessment of need, not on demand.

How can the Executive and the Minister for Health and Community Care have any respect for old age when the minister recommends that free care should be provided only to those dementia sufferers with the greatest need?

Susan Deacon rose—

Mary Scanlon: I want to finish my point.

Dementia can only get worse. The minister is setting up a system that will continually test and assess the frail and elderly until they are sufficiently ill to fit her definition. How cruel and demeaning can she be? When she considers her views on personal care, will she follow the advice of the chief nursing officer? Point 29 of the report by the chief nursing officer for Scotland's group on free nursing care states that those who refuse assessment

"need to be made aware that to do so will prevent their nursing care being paid for."

Point 26 says that

"reassessment of need should be as frequent as the person requires".

Where do respect and dignity fit into that approach? The care of someone with mild dementia is not paid for. The care of someone who is cantankerous, thrawn or downright independent is not paid for. Someone who values their self-respect, dignity and independence in old age gets no help. However, someone who submits to endless assessments until they finally fit the new Deacon definition of personal care might just get help. What does it profit a man to gain the minister's grudging, tight-fisted measure of personal care if he loses all his dignity and self-respect on the way?

As Alzheimer Scotland says, the development group is a delaying tactic. We know that the vast majority of Labour members support the funding of personal care for the elderly. Today, they have run out of excuses and run out of time. Today is their opportunity to help old people in Scotland.

Dr Simpson: Will the member give way?

Mary Scanlon: No—I am on my final sentence.

There is political will in the Parliament to give our old folk care, dignity and security in their old age—can Labour members afford not to support the motion?

11:30

Mr Keith Raffan (Mid Scotland and Fife) (LD): There are two issues at the heart of the debate. First, the principle of free personal care for all older people: an issue on which there is a genuine difference of opinion between the Liberal Democrats and Labour ministers. The second is that of the status of the Scottish Parliament and the extent to which the Executive is not just sensitive but responsive to the clear will of members of the Parliament.

The Scottish Parliament is not Westminster and Holyrood is not a rubber stamp for an all-powerful UK Government. The Scottish Executive is a partnership that has formed a coalition Government between two parties. Ministers cannot get what they want simply by driving it through using a large majority: there is no large majority. They have to persuade and convince; the Executive cannot command support, it must win it.

I will start by saying what we in the Scottish Liberal Democrats want, and why. We want the Executive to make a clear, firm and unequivocal commitment in principle to free personal care for all older people, with a definite timetable for implementation. We do not expect that to happen overnight. Indeed, our own federal pre-general election manifesto stated that the Liberal Democrats

"aim to provide free personal care for those in long-term care, by the end of the next Parliament".

That means by either 2005 or 2006. Being in government means living in the real world. The timing of implementation is a matter of resources and of when those resources become available.

We welcome the minister's announcement yesterday of a development group on long-term care. That group will build on what has already been achieved and carry forward work on implementation. Members need to know as precisely as we can how many older people would be eligible for free personal care and what the cost would be—then we will find out whose estimates are closer to reality, Stewart Sutherland's or David Lipsey's. I know whose estimates I would back.

Why do the Liberal Democrats believe in free personal care for all older people? I do not intend to rehearse the arguments in detail: they can be found in the reports of the Sutherland commission and the Health and Community Care Committee. The arguments centre, of course, on fairness. They centre on equity. They centre on delivery of service to all in need. All their lives, older people have expected to be looked after and cared for in their old age. They have paid national insurance with that expectation in mind. They should not have to face their final years in fear.

Targeting, or restricting, resources to the most needy requires means-testing. It will also result in increased bureaucracy. Worse, it will lead to a lower take-up of what is, for many, a badly needed benefit. Means-testing is stressful for those who have to go through it—and especially so for the elderly. Means-testing does not easily equate with the dignity and respect that is the right of older people.

Susan Deacon: Does Keith Raffan agree that the implementation of the Sutherland report would not result in the abolition of means-testing? Does he also agree that the single needs assessment process that I announced yesterday—which is to be piloted this year and rolled out next year—will lead to a reduction in bureaucracy in the system?

Mr Raffan: I am about to pay some tribute to the minister. I accept what she says and I accept that the Sutherland report includes means-testing, particularly of living costs, but we are talking about the element of free personal care. The minister talked about an argument on the "head of a pin". It is that small—we are dancing on the head of a pin. If it is that small, why will the Executive not move towards our position? Why is the minister being so stubborn? Why is she so reluctant to move in principle?

We are proud of what the Executive has achieved so far for the elderly. I might add that I have a high respect for the minister. I have three health boards in my constituency that are confronting major issues and facing serious problems. Hers is no easy task. Despite a £5.5 billion plus budget for the national health service in Scotland, there is no surfeit of resources. Resources are scarce and there is competition for them everywhere.

The minister was right yesterday when she said that much has been done; she was also right when she said that much remains to be done. The Liberal Democrats welcomed her October announcement as a landmark for older people in Scotland. She had every right to claim that that package of proposals, investing up to an extra £100 million a year, would deliver radical change for the elderly—far more than Westminster has so far delivered. That is entirely to the Executive's credit.

We welcome the additional measures, with resources to match, that the minister announced yesterday, to extend the provision of free care to many more older people in Scotland—and especially to dementia sufferers who are in desperate need. We welcome the decision that additional resources for long-term care will be a top priority of this Administration. All the sadder then—from our perspective and in view of the Executive's distinguished record of achievement for the elderly—that the minister cannot bring herself to take that one further step and commit the Scottish Executive in principle to free personal care for all older people.

We are with the Executive on the journey towards improved care for the elderly; it is the ultimate destination on which we differ. There is a genuine difference between us on the Liberal Democrat benches and Labour ministers. However, a difference of opinion is not a ground for divorce. It may be uncomfortable and unsettling for both parties, but working to ensure that the current tension between us is creative—and positive in outcome—can lead to the maturing and strengthening of our relationship.

What we seek today is not the defeat of the Executive but a victory for the elderly—a victory that will make a real difference to their quality of life and a victory that will accord them the respect and dignity they deserve. And yes, we seek a victory for this Parliament too—one that will mark a further step in our development and a significant stage in our growth towards the mature and powerful Parliament for which the Scottish people voted and which our country deserves.

11:37

Christine Grahame (South of Scotland) (SNP): Richard Simpson referred to beginning a journey with the development group. As Mary Scanlon said, that journey began on 4 December 1997, when the royal commission was required to report, within 12 months, on long-term care for the elderly. It did. The report has since lain around for nearly two years. Do not frown at me, Labour members, I am coming to the point.

The Health and Community Care Committee took it upon itself to follow up the work of the report and it produced its own recommendations. I commend Mary Scanlon, Margaret Smith, Kay Ullrich and many others for that. I, too, followed up on it, lodging the first motion in Parliament calling for full implementation of Sutherland on free personal care. I proposed a member's bill at the same time. Since then, I have tinkered with that bill and put it on the back burner because I thought—I foolishly thought—after hearing Mr McLeish's words in this chamber that Labour would deliver on free personal care. Mr McLeish flirted and teased, here and in the press, on this serious and crucial issue. Today, we are coming to a test for this Parliament on delivery for Scotland's elderly people.

Down south, Labour's parliamentary colleagues say that implementing Sutherland in full would help rich pensioners. Well, yes—all these years since 1997, rich pensioners have been selling their council houses to pay for their personal care. Richard Simpson knows that not all pensioners who are selling their houses are suffering from dementia; many are sentient and know that they are losing their homes and their possessions. Families sometimes lie to them and tell them that their homes remain. Of course the personal care that they seek is not free: they have paid for it for years, with their taxes and national insurance. All they ask is the same treatment and care in their old age as others expect in a civilised society.

Yesterday, the minister announced a review. There is to be a report in another six months—conveniently after a general election. The leader in The Scotsman today is headed:

"McLeish plays for time on care of the elderly".

I count the delay from 1997 to now at three and a half years—not bad at playing for time.

The one thing that Scotland's frail elderly do not have is time. The delay is the Executive's disgrace. There is a coalition in the chamber on behalf of Scotland's elderly. I hope that the Parliament will tell Scotland loudly and clearly that across this chamber we stand by Sutherland and we stand by the frail elderly. That coalition is asking with one voice on personal care—when?

11:40

Mrs Margaret Smith (Edinburgh West) (LD): I will read from the report of the Health and Community Care Committee on the delivery of community care in Scotland:

"The Committee welcomes the steps that have been taken towards implementation of several of the key recommendations within the Sutherland Report. It is persuaded however by the substantial body of evidence presented to it that there should be no charge for services assessed as being required to meet the personal care needs of an individual. It therefore recommends to the Executive that free personal care should be provided on the basis of assessed need."

That was signed by members of all the major parties in the Parliament, including Richard Simpson, despite the impression he has given today.

This morning, I just happened to open the committee report at a page with a comment by Malcolm Chisholm, from 31 May. On the Sutherland report he said:

"I do not agree with the minority report".—[Official Report, Health and Community Care Committee, 31 May 2000; c 972.]

The support in the chamber for free personal care knows no bounds: there is support for the coalition for Scotland's elderly from the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care and other ministers from both parties and from members from every party in the chamber.

As Keith Raffan said, there are two fundamental issues. The first is about policy—what is fair, what is right and what will deliver the best possible community care services. The second is the power of this Parliament. I thank John Swinney: by withdrawing his motion on the powers of the Parliament, he has given us the opportunity to debate these issues. I hope that today we send out a very clear message about the power of the majority will of the Parliament, which is to listen to professionals, carers and users of services, as the Health and Community Care Committee did.

This is about making prudent use of finance. I have not heard anyone, today or in the earlier, long debates on the issue, call for free personal care to be delivered next week, next month or the month after that. However, we are the voice of our country: if this is the majority will of the people in this chamber, then let it be spoken and acted on. That would be the right course of action.

Yesterday, the Minister for Health and Community Care set out important steps on the journey towards achieving free personal care. As she said today, we are dancing on the head of a pin. That is why those of us who are disappointed feel that way—because we are almost there. The minister is responsible for a very great deal of the good work and progress that has been made. Yesterday, she said that people in Scotland are not interested in aspirations. If that were so, most of the Executive documents over the past year and a half would not have been printed.

Aspiration is about what we are, who we are, what we believe in and what we want to see happen for our country. We must send a message to people that we must be prudent, we must take forward work over the next six months, we must audit how the community care pound is spent and we must find the best way to put joint working into practice. There is a lot of work to do to untangle ourselves from the benefits system across the UK and the cross-border links and the possibility of people hobbling across the border into Scotland with their zimmers. What the Health and Community Care Committee wants—and what the Scottish Liberal Democrats want—is a commitment to the end of that process; a commitment that could begin today with the majority will of the Parliament being stated loud and clear.

The issue is not one of wealthy pensioners but of attacking thrift and personal responsibility. Despite the welcome announcement by the Minister for Health and Community Care yesterday on single assessments, it is about leaving in place charges for services. It does not matter whether it is called personal care or nursing care or whatever, some people will still be charged. As the Royal College of General Practitioners made clear to the Health and Community Care Committee, some people will not get the services they require and the care they should have.

The minister and the Executive have gone further than their colleagues in England and Wales. In October and yesterday, they put in place a good package of measures to improve things for the people of Scotland. However, the final step is still left. Today the Parliament has the opportunity to say that we want to take that step. It is right for Scotland's pensioners and for Scotland's Parliament.

11:45

Margaret Jamieson (Kilmarnock and Loudoun) (Lab): This morning's debate has focused on one issue rather than surveyed the big picture of how we treat and look after our older people who are in need of care. The Health and Community Care Committee took more than 10 months to complete its investigation into the delivery of community care. Yesterday, the Executive published its response to the committee's recommendations. It is a disservice to this chamber to use it to ignore the committee's recommendations and the Executive's positive responses and to pursue just one issue in isolation.

It is recognised that care needs must be assessed and that they must be understood in the same way throughout Scotland. The chief nursing officer undertook the task of considering, for the first time, what nursing care comprises. That report also was published yesterday and it confirms the way forward recommended by the Health and Community Care Committee. The success of that approach depends on all in the care stream being signed up to the process. It is right that a larger pilot of the care needs assessment package for the elderly should be conducted and evaluated before it is rolled out across Scotland. The value of evidence-based best practice was recognised in the committee's report.

The complexity of current funding and services was made clear to the members of the Health and Community Care Committee by the many individuals who gave evidence. A simplified, equitable and transparent system based on assessed need was called for. The committee recognised that that could not be achieved overnight and that significant work would be needed. The commitment to undertake that work was given by the Executive yesterday.

I quote the Executive's response to the committee:

"We agree with the Royal Commission that greater equity should be achieved in charging for care and that existing anomalies should be addressed. We committed ourselves to start by ending the anomaly whereby nursing care was charged for in some settings, but not others. We made clear our determination to adopt an approach which was person centred and based on need. The report of the Chief Nursing Officer's group on free nursing care makes detailed proposals for a move to a single needs assessment for each individual requiring care. The proposed approach is person centred and recognises that different individuals have different levels of needs, often resulting in a complex mix of care needs which do not fit neatly into boxes."

As a member of the Health and Community Care Committee, I recall the collective desire of those who gave evidence to ensure equity, the individuality and dignity of our older people and that appropriate services should be provided for them. I believe that we have embarked on doing that and I commend Richard Simpson's amendment.

11:49

Mr Duncan Hamilton (Highlands and Islands) (SNP): I will begin by doing two things I thought I never would. The first is to praise the Liberal Democrats for making a stand on principle—they deserve a degree of credit for that. I ask them to resist Richard Simpson's overtures on returning to the fold. I must tell Margaret Smith that a rough wooing might be the way to describe it. Today could be a defining moment for the Parliament; I hope it will be. After this debate and after the motion is, I hope, passed, the fight must continue within the coalition. The issue will not be resolved today and we have no assurance from the Executive.

Secondly, I will come to the defence of the Minister for Health and Community Care—for once. It is unfortunate that she has been left carrying the can for the debacle. Henry McLeish is the person who told us, in all but the detail, that he was going to go down this road. It was Henry McLeish who engaged in the cruel flirtation with Scotland's elderly yet, in an act of unparalleled cowardice, fled the field and left the minister to pick up the pieces. Surely the role of the Minister for Health and Community Care is to fight against that—she should be arguing the case within the Government.

Ian Jenkins (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD): Will the member give way?

Mr Hamilton: No. The minister did not do much to her credit when she told us why she would not give us a principled commitment to free personal care. She said that she would not give an open commitment until she had worked out the details of implementation. What has been happening in the two years since Sutherland was published? That was the time for the reviews and thoughts on implementation. That was the point at which the minister should have been taking forward not just the points that the Executive has been praised for—

Susan Deacon: Will the member give way?

Mr Hamilton: No.

Two years on, the minister should know why we should progress and how it should be done. We know that the Executive displays a stubborn refusal to listen to civic Scotland. Dr Simpson told us that that is Opposition carping. I suggest that when the British Medical Association, Scottish Care, Help the Aged, the Royal College of Nursing and Age Concern Scotland come together to say that they are hugely disappointed with the package—Maureen O'Neill from Age Concern Scotland described yesterday's announcement as the worst of both worlds—it is not Opposition carping, but the genuine concern of the Scottish community.

We know about the arrogant dismissal of the conclusions of the Scottish Parliament's Health and Community Care Committee. There was unanimous agreement—including Malcolm Chisholm, who is now the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care—that there should be universal free personal care. That position included Richard Simpson, who, today, has conveniently forgotten that. We know that the situation puts Malcolm Chisholm in a difficult position. However, if the committee or the Parliament and its structures mean anything to Susan Deacon, she must listen to the unanimous, cross-party view.

We do not know where we go from here. Last night, on "Newsnight Scotland", Malcolm Chisholm was asked several times what would happen if—or, indeed, when—the SNP motion was passed. What will be the Executive's response to the majority of the Parliament saying that we believe that personal care should be free? Will that view be resisted or accepted by the Executive? I would be happy to give way to the minister now, if she would clarify that point. I see that she intends to remain seated.

There has been much talk about a constitutional crisis and what will happen to the coalition. I do not care what happens to the coalition and whether it stays together or breaks down. I care about the will of the Parliament being ignored. If the unanimous view of the majority of members is that personal care should be free and the Executive decides to ignore the Parliament, it will set an astoundingly dangerous precedent.

The Parliament is not here for the Executive or the parties of the politicians—it is here for the people of Scotland. Yesterday's announcement let those people down. Today we have an unrivalled opportunity to put the record straight and to say, as a country and as a Parliament, that we believe in universal free personal care. When the Scottish Parliament says that, the Executive had better listen.

11:53

Bill Aitken (Glasgow) (Con): Let us be clear about one thing: this morning's debate goes much further than the rights and wrongs of the full implementation of the Sutherland report. Surely that argument is finished. Every member of the Parliament is personally committed to Sutherland and only the Labour component of the coalition is dragging its heels on the subject. The arguments in support of full implementation are compelling and have been articulated well by many members. Everyone has accepted those arguments. I draw the Parliament's attention to the report of the Health and Community Care Committee, which recommended full implementation and to which Malcolm Chisholm—then a member of the committee—signed up quite happily.

The issue is not now about care and compassion for the elderly—to which I know we are all committed; the issue is the personal credibility of the First Minister. In interview after interview, news feature after news feature, report after report and in replies to parliamentary questions, the First Minister implied strongly that Sutherland would be implemented in full and in the near future. Now, the hopes of many elderly people and their relatives have been dashed because Henry McLeish cannot deliver.

When such things happen, one must wonder about the relationship between the Executive and the Westminster Parliament. Like Duncan Hamilton, I have a scintilla of sympathy for Susan Deacon. Over the past few weeks, her statements have been much more circumspect than have those of Henry McLeish. Her caution was clearly well founded. If the minister feels some inhibition and embarrassment in having to explain the situation to organisations such as Age Concern Scotland, she would be entitled to feel that she has been sold the hospital pass and left without a prayer by the First Minister.

However, any sympathy for Susan Deacon is dispelled by the fact that she is part of an Administration that has spun mercilessly over recent weeks and has built up the hopes of thousands of vulnerable people in Scotland, only to dash them at the last minute. Labour, and Henry McLeish in particular, has been left without a shred of credibility in the matter. It is clear that Mr McLeish has been unable to carry Treasury ministers at Westminster with him in what he was seeking to do. That speaks volumes about his credibility at Westminster as well.

It is clear that the implementation of Sutherland has a cost. The Conservatives would not pretend that such issues have anything other than the most far-reaching consequences for the future of health spending provision. The Conservative party prides itself on a fairly hard-headed approach to financial issues. We thought long and hard about how the Sutherland proposals could be funded and supported and came to the inescapable conclusion that we could no longer be party to a system where prudence is penalised. We recognised the agony being suffered by many elderly people and their relatives. In common with the Scottish National Party, the Liberal Democrats, the Scottish Socialist Party and the Green Party, we recognised that such injustices had to be remedied and that the proposals should be implemented in full, immediately.

Is it not the ultimate irony that the first crisis that the Executive and the Scottish Parliament faces as a result of the devolution settlement should arise not out of the activities of the SNP, which is committed to independence, but because Gordon Brown refuses to put his money where Henry McLeish's mouth is?

11:57

Ms Sandra White (Glasgow) (SNP): The minister said that she is glad to have today's debate. I am not particularly glad that we are having the debate and I am not glad to speak in it. I am not glad about it because the debate should and need not have happened. It could easily have been avoided if the First Minister—unfortunately, he is not here—had had the courage of his convictions. This, as we all know, is the Scottish Parliament and the Executive is—in Mr McLeish's words—the Scottish Government. It is time that everyone, particularly the Scottish Government, acted on behalf of the Scottish people.

I am convener of a cross-party group on the elderly. In that role, I have met numerous groups across Scotland and the topic that is raised most often is the Sutherland report and its implementation in full. I see that Malcolm Chisholm has turned to speak to one of his colleagues. Perhaps he should be listening, given that he was the former joint convener of the cross-party group. Clearly he is not listening, just as he did not listen to most of the people who spoke to him at the cross-party group. I would like to mention a couple of people who were involved in the cross-party talks with Malcolm Chisholm and me: Phyllis Herriot and John Wilson of the Scottish Pensioners Association. Those people, among others, came to our cross-party group in the faith that we would listen to them and perhaps put forward their concerns and those of the pensioners whom they represent. Those people have been let down by the Labour part of the Scottish Government. Malcolm Chisholm should think about that.

On several occasions, Henry McLeish made announcements to the newspapers about the implementation of the Sutherland report. He gave hope to such people, who took the time to visit us. He gave them hope and then snatched it away.

I will give Age Concern Scotland's comment: the world is divided into two sorts of people—those who care and those who do not; those who have had to deal with the difficulties of arranging and paying for the care of older people and those who think that old age and its attendant difficulties are nothing to do with them.

Tony Blair has indicated that the Government seems to believe that the majority of the electorate are in the latter category. Let us not allow the Scottish Government to be in the latter category.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: There are still two members who wish to speak. I can accommodate them both, if they will be brief.

12:00

Donald Gorrie (Central Scotland) (LD): I join those who paid tribute to the minister for the progress that we have made so far, which is welcome.

On the basic issue, let me give the analogy that we are walking in the same direction, but the terminus of our walk is free personal care. Getting there might take some time, and we might have to wander round a few hills and glens, but we must get there. There is all the difference in the world between stating that our commitment is to get there and saying that various groups will examine the issue and something might happen.

The key point is that on a fundamental issue, the minister and some of her party—perhaps the whole of her party, although I do not believe that—believe one thing. If they do so in good conscience, there is nothing wrong with that—the majority in the Parliament believes something different. We have to have a mechanism so that the Parliament's will prevails. That means that the ministers must take account of the views of Parliament. They cannot just sail on as if nothing has happened at all.

I know that it is difficult for people who have been brought up in the Labour party tradition to accept losing votes. I have spent my whole life losing votes. I have probably lost more votes than anyone in recorded history, having been in two councils for many years. It does not mean that someone is bad or wrong if they lose a vote—I have been consistently right and lost all the votes—but in this case, the Executive has to accept that the majority of the Parliament, coming from different angles but doing so conscientiously and based on good information, such as that from all-party committees and that contained in the Sutherland report, believes that something should happen, so something must happen. It does not mean that the Minister for Health and Community Care has to run up the white flag and say, "I abjectly surrender", but the policy of the Executive must be modified significantly to meet the majority wish of the Parliament. If it is not modified, there will be serious trouble, and I will do my best to create it.

12:03

Ms Margo MacDonald (Lothians) (SNP): I promise to be right beside Donald Gorrie when he does his best to create trouble. I add my weight, which is shrinking fast, to that.

I shall address only two points of principle, because I do not pretend to be an expert on the matter, and I defer to many of the Labour members who have spoken, with whom I have a disagreement today, because in this area they have expertise that I do not share. However, we once did share a belief in the principle of the universality of benefits and services so that people do not fall through the cracks. I urge those Labour members who still share that belief to realise that the tremendous advances that the Minister for Health and Community Care outlined with regard to needs and care assessments, and the amalgamation of different styles of caring, can be accomplished while achieving the aim of universality.

We have a sophisticated taxation system now, which can be used in a way that previous generations could not do to achieve the dream of universality and equality. I urge the minister to accept the principle of universality of service provision. The people whom the Minister for Health and Community Care reckons can afford to pay and should not be supplied with free services—unlike those whom she wishes to target with means-testing—will still be caught in the net of income tax. There is a way to achieve the principles that are being espoused in the chamber, while achieving what the minister is trying to do in the Executive, or Government.

Ian Jenkins rose—

Ms MacDonald: Briefly, I will mention the other principle, because that is the one on which I think Jenkins will want to intervene.

The second principle is that which Donald Gorrie spoke about. There is no use in having a Parliament if it does not speak for the people. We know what the people say. I urge everyone to listen to them, but I will listen first to Jenkins.

Ian Jenkins: We all agree that we are approaching the debate from the correct angle, but I worry that we are in danger of sending out a message to old people that they will never, ever have to sell their house to look after themselves in their old age. If we are talking about spin and unrealistic expectations, we must ensure that that is not one of those expectations.

Christine Grahame rose—

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I call Margo MacDonald.

Ms MacDonald: I do not mind if other members speak.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Please close, Ms MacDonald.

Ms MacDonald: Right.

I am sorry that I cannot guess from this distance what my colleague Christine Grahame might have said. She might have wanted to say, "Ian, we're nowhere near that yet." We are nowhere near the spin on and the interpretation of the outcome of the debate. We are still trying genuinely to debate the issue.

The debate revolves round two principles: long-term care, and the status and effectiveness of the Parliament in meeting the aspirations of people in Scotland.

12:06

George Lyon (Argyll and Bute) (LD): I thank John Swinney for making available some of the SNP's time to debate a motion from the Liberal Democrats. In view of yesterday's statement, it was important that the Parliament had a chance to make its views known.

Richard Simpson has lodged an amendment, which Duncan Hamilton rightly described as rough wooing. The level of support for Richard's amendment was shown by Margaret Jamieson's supporting speech, which she made through gritted teeth, to say the least.

Richard Simpson talked about demographics and about where the line is drawn between the state's responsibilities and those of the elderly pensioner. Sir Stewart Sutherland dealt with that in his report and described the demographic issue as a red herring. He drew the line between state support and the responsibility of the individual, by ensuring that hotel and living costs remained the individual's responsibility. The line is drawn. Richard Simpson's last point was that the Liberal Democrats were pandering to the Opposition. Richard is pandering to London, and that is the problem.

I recognise that the Minister for Health and Community Care and the Executive have gone a long way in delivering Sir Stewart Sutherland's recommendations. Yesterday's announcement took us slightly further along that road, but not the full distance. Why was the Minister for Health and Community Care unwilling to take that last step? She talks about dancing on the head of a pin. It is she who is dancing on the head of a pin. We agree with everything in the statement—it is what was not in the statement that we disagree with.

We all know the First Minister's position. After the previous debate on long-term care, when pressure from Labour and Liberal Democrat MSPs kept the door open, Henry McLeish started to walk through the door. In the media, we have been led to believe that the decision was a done deal. Why? Given the cross-party support for that deal and the unanimous backing of the cross-party Health and Community Care Committee for Sir Stewart Sutherland, why on earth did the First Minister raise expectations to such a level, only for the Minister for Health and Community Care to dash them completely yesterday? We must ask that question. I hope that the minister answers it.

The debate boils down to one simple question—are the minister and rest of the Executive willing to accept the will of Parliament and the wishes of the Scottish people, or will they ignore them? I ask the minister to recognise that—as Keith Raffan pointed out—this is not Westminster. No party here has a majority in its own right. The minister must recognise that, if the Parliament expresses the view that Sutherland should be implemented, that is precisely what must happen.

12:10

David McLetchie (Lothians) (Con): It is clear from the speeches in the debate today that a majority in the Parliament supports the implementation of the Sutherland recommendation of free personal care.

I take pleasure from the fact that, back in September, we were the first party in the Parliament to introduce a motion and a debate on the matter, and I welcome the support that we received then from the Scottish National Party and a few Liberal Democrat members. I also welcome the fact that the majority of Liberal Democrats appear to have changed their position on the matter and are supporting Nicola Sturgeon's motion on behalf of the SNP. That is a very generous sentiment.

Mr John Swinney (North Tayside) (SNP): Will the member give way?

David McLetchie: I am sorry, but I have only a few minutes.

The only missing link in the Parliament is the Scottish Executive, although we know that there are many in the Labour group who do not support the Executive's position. Not so long ago, one of them wrote:

"It is equitable that individuals should pay for their own personal living costs wherever their place of residence, but have personal care and nursing care costs met out of taxation. It is what the current generation of older Scots had expected in paying their tax and National Insurance over a working lifetime."

That was Dr Richard Simpson in Holyrood magazine in September last year. It is not the Dr Richard Simpson whose intemperate speech—highly uncharacteristic of him—was delivered in the chamber this morning. If this is the major breakthrough that he claims—and that the minister claimed in her statement yesterday—I ask him, on the basis of his experience, how many of the 8,000 people in residential care in Scotland will benefit from it. What dent will be made in that tally by the minister's announcements yesterday?

Dr Simpson spoke about renationalisation of health care—that is absolute nonsense. As he well knows, since the inception under his party of the national health service in 1948, people have had to pay for personal, nursing and living costs in residential and nursing homes. People are living longer, so what has changed is the scale of the problem, which must have more resources devoted to it. To talk about renationalisation of health care is complete and utter nonsense.

Dr Simpson: Will the member give way?

David McLetchie: I am sorry, but I have only a few minutes.

As Nicola Sturgeon said, we know that the issue is not one of affordability. The money is effectively there. It is a tiny fraction of the total health budget, and less than last year's underspend in the Scottish health budget, which was £135 million. It is less than lumberjack McConnell filched from the health budget last year for Scotland's trees and to pay for the landscaping of the Scottish Parliament building.

Susan Deacon: Will the member give way?

David McLetchie: No.

Let us not pretend that lack of money is the problem. Why is the recommendation not being implemented? One explanation that has been advanced is that Mr McLeish and the rest of the Executive wanted to go ahead, but were blocked by the Prime Minister and his emissaries. It is all to do with control from London by Labour.

It may well be a matter of internal party management. There may be internal party reasons, bound up in the Westminster Government and the Labour general election campaign. However, there is another explanation. Keith Raffan asked why the minister is so stubborn. The fact is that there is a body of opinion within the Labour party in Scotland, led by Susan Deacon, which is implacably opposed to the principle of free personal care. That body of opinion is stubborn because it regards the 8,000 people in residential homes in Scotland as wealthy, and it does not intend to devote any additional resources to them.

As Christine Grahame and Bill Aitken said, I do not call someone living in a £30,000 former council house rich or wealthy; such a person does not regard themselves as rich or wealthy. It is an issue of fairness. Those people have paid into the national health service throughout their working lives. Now, in their hour of need, they feel that they have earned the right to be looked after. As Bill Aitken said, their prudence should not be penalised.

It is quite clear from the contributions to today's debate and from the way it has gone over the past six months that the Labour Scottish Executive has lost the argument. Susan Deacon has lost the argument, so why does not she quit while she is behind, accept the terms of the motion and act on it?

12:15

The Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care (Malcolm Chisholm): Nicola Sturgeon and Margaret Smith referred to my previous views. I am happy to refer the whole chamber to the speech that I made on 28 September, when I said that free personal care was a priority, but so was the expansion of home care and respite care and the ending of delayed discharges, so that everyone can get appropriate care wherever they happen to be. That is the big picture that Margaret Jamieson was referring to.

Shona Robison (North-East Scotland) (SNP): While he is reminding us of what he said in the chamber, perhaps the minister could also comment on what he said when he was a member of the Health and Community Care Committee:

"Ultimately, we should not change what we think because of what the Executive thinks".—[Official Report, Health and Community Care Committee, 6 September 2000; c 1148.]

What has changed for him since then?

Malcolm Chisholm: I have just told members that nothing has changed. The considerable resources that we have put into services for older people must meet all those priorities. I remind members of the £100 million announced by Susan Deacon on 5 October 2000 and of her commitment yesterday to make additional resources for older people a top priority in future. We are determined to move forward on a broad front, increasing the quantity of services, improving the quality of services, dealing with the systems issues and addressing equity of charging. Mary Scanlon referred to the Health and Community Care Committee. There was substantial agreement between the Executive and committee members, particularly on systems issues.

It is not only today's issues that are relevant to charging. I remind members that, on 5 October 2000, we said that we would try to address unevenness of charging across Scotland, and we will take a reserved power to ensure that that happens. Today, however, we are focusing on Sir Stewart Sutherland's recommendation on personal care. The important point to make is that we have started a process that will push forward the boundary between what is free and what is to be paid for. We cannot define the precise end point, but I remind members of the Alzheimer Scotland—Action on Dementia press release that said that there had been a major breakthrough. I also tell George Lyon that what is proposed is certainly not a London solution, because the journey that we are going on is quite different from the journey south of the border.

Mr Rumbles: When he was a member of the Health and Community Care Committee, Malcolm Chisholm supported the committee's call for free personal care. Now that he is a minister, he is against that call. Will his constituents in Edinburgh North and Leith understand his position?

Malcolm Chisholm: I have already dealt with my views, all of which are on the record. I cannot spend any more time on that issue, although I should remind Bill Aitken that I left the Health and Community Care Committee on 1 November.

One of the tasks of the development group, as Dr Simpson's amendment states, is

"to consider the practicalities, costs and implications of providing free personal care".

I thank Keith Raffan for supporting that objective. The development group is not a review group, but a group focused on action and implementation over a short time scale.

Christine Grahame: Why is it taking two years? The Sutherland report will be two years old in March. Why has it taken the Executive two years to set up a development group?

Malcolm Chisholm: On 5 October, we announced our response to the report and we are now pushing it forward. We have had two excellent announcements for older people, one yesterday and one on 5 October.

I appeal to the Liberal Democrats to support the process that we have started and to have confidence in the group. They may not be reassured by my chairing it, although I hope that they are, but perhaps they will be reassured by the presence on the group of Mary Marshall, who is the director of the dementia services centre at the University of Stirling and who was a member of the royal commission. Perhaps they will also be reassured by the words of Sir Stewart Sutherland, who has not taken the attitude of some Opposition members, but is willing to work with that group. It would be entirely consistent with what the Liberal Democrats said in their Scottish Parliament manifesto and in their new manifesto for the UK general election for them to support the group and to support Richard Simpson's amendment.

Mrs Smith: Will the member give way?

Malcolm Chisholm: I think that I am out of time. Is that right, Presiding Officer?

The Deputy Presiding Officer: You are indeed. You must close now.

Malcolm Chisholm: Okay.

12:20

Tommy Sheridan (Glasgow) (SSP): First, my amendment is basically a tidying-up amendment. I do not think that the SNP will disagree with it in any way, as it merely seeks to state a fact, which is that of the six political parties represented in the Parliament, five are committed to a definite time scale for the implementation of free, universal personal care.

It has been pointed out that the debate is about the elderly citizens of Scotland. I read in the Evening Times last night the comments of one Bill McVey, who may be known to some of the Glasgow members, as he is chair of the Glasgow elderly forum. He is a 77-year-old activist, if that is not a contradiction in terms—he has a lot of energy; he is a war veteran. Bill said of the whole debate:

"We are the generation who gave everything, now the politicians want to take everything."

That type of comment reflects the point of view of the likes of Bill McVey and tens of thousands of senior citizens the length and breadth of Scotland, who are asking the Parliament to make a firm commitment today to implementing universal free care. No one today has attacked what the Executive has announced. No one has undermined in any way what the Executive has brought forward; what we are attacking is what it has not brought forward.

Let us be absolutely clear about the time scale. In March 1998, the Sutherland commission was established. It had until March 1999 to give its one-year report. The minister commented on the report in October. Let us be clear: the minister gave a very honest assessment of the Executive's response to Sutherland. She ruled out at that stage the implementation of free universal care. The majority of members, certainly those from the Opposition parties, opposed the minister's position when she made her statement.

Susan Deacon: Would Tommy Sheridan care to examine the Official Report and the detailed written response that was made at that time? I said that we agree with the principle of equity upon which the recommendation is based, but that we believe that to implement it at this time, when so many wider needs exist, would not be right. Our discussion of the subject and any progress on it has been based, as Malcolm Chisholm said, on asking how we can make progress, while ensuring that we meet other priorities and do all the other things with which all members in the chamber also agree.

Tommy Sheridan: The minister will accept that she talked the language of priorities. As far as she was concerned, this particular recommendation of Sutherland's 24 recommendations was not a priority. We had the debate. We had the fall-out. We had the argument. There was a lot of disappointment across Scotland. The problem is that the First Minister then intervened. That is what changed the whole debate. The First Minister entered the debate and raised the prospect—the hope—of the decision being changed. Unfortunately, from November right up until now, he dillied, he dallied and he dazzled. Ultimately, he has failed to deliver. In fact, the Minister for Health and Community Care has been consistent throughout the debate. The problem is that the Parliament's expectations have been raised, only to be dashed by the First Minister.

As a socialist, I disagree with the Sutherland recommendations, because they argue for the retention of means-testing in relation to living and housing costs. As a socialist, I believe that we should tax people directly, so that when they need personal or health service care, they get it free at the point of need. I disagree with retaining an element of means-testing. However, Sutherland did argue for the removal of means-testing in relation to personal care. What the Minister for Health and Community Care is failing to do today is to announce that that is what the Executive will do and then deliver the resources to achieve it.

It is a failure of the Government to say, as the minister said this morning, that it cannot make that announcement because it does not think that it has the ability to deliver on it. Is not that what government is about? Make the announcement today, name the date when it will be implemented and then ensure that the resources are available to deliver universal free care for our elderly.

12:25

Shona Robison (North-East Scotland) (SNP): This has been a good debate, and I hope that it ends up being a defining moment for the Parliament. As many members have said, it is about the will of the majority of the Parliament prevailing on an issue that is of huge importance to tens of thousands of people throughout Scotland, and their families. If there is to be a defining moment, I want it to be about such an important issue.

The SNP welcomes the steps that have been taken to improve the delivery of community care in Scotland. Time and again, when the minister has made an announcement that will improve the lives of elderly people in Scotland, we have said that we welcome it.

This is not a choice between what the minister has announced and what is in the SNP's motion; they are not mutually exclusive. Members—including Margaret Smith—have said time and again that this is about completing the last part of the jigsaw.

If this is about dancing on the head of a pin, as Susan Deacon claimed, why all the fuss? It is an awful lot of fuss about a very small pin.

The more the minister refuses to accept the will of the Parliament, the more stubborn for its own sake she is seen to be, because her arguments against full implementation have become weaker and weaker in every debate that we have had on the issue. The case that has been made by all members cannot be opposed rationally by Susan Deacon or Malcolm Chisholm; they have lost the argument, so it is time to accept the consequences and do the right thing.

To be fair, Susan Deacon has remained consistently opposed to full implementation, unlike her leader, who has given clear signals in support of full implementation over the past few weeks. At least that has given us the opportunity today to finish the debate once and for all, by accepting the majority will of Parliament fully to implement Sutherland and to get on with the job of doing so.

Susan Deacon implied that that would be a dangerous road, as services might not be in place to cope with the consequences of free personal care. That could be solved easily, by today setting a defined and clear time scale during which the necessary services could be established and put in place. There is no problem. We do not need another review; we need an unequivocal statement from the minister that she will commit herself to full implementation within a clear time scale. Nothing less than that will do. We do not want any more of the delay that Christine Grahame mentioned—three and a half years have passed so far. We do not want to wait another six months or another year; we want the statement now.

If the SNP motion is passed today, we will expect Susan Deacon to come back with a timetable for the full implementation of Sutherland. That is what we will expect and we will settle for nothing less.

Can we do this? Yes, we can. Clear evidence has been given about affordability.

Dr Simpson: I draw Shona Robison's attention to my amendment, which requires the development—not review—group

"to consider the practicalities, costs and implications of providing free personal care for all and to report by August 2001".

That is the absolute intention behind the development group.

Shona Robison: In that case, why has the minister time and again refused to commit herself to the full implementation of Sutherland? That refusal clearly indicates to the Parliament that she does not intend to go through with full implementation unless the Parliament's will prevails and she is forced to do so.

Malcolm Chisholm: Will the member give way?

Shona Robison: I want to continue.

Affordability is not an issue. The last piece of the jigsaw is estimated to cost about £25 million. Henry McLeish has said:

"We will be spending approximately £55 billion every three years. Is anyone really suggesting that, with the teachers and with the Sutherland report, that is money that cannot be made available out of our budget?"

If Henry McLeish does not seem to think so, I will take his word for it. We should be able to find the £25 million without any great difficulty.

Malcolm Chisholm: At the beginning of the debate, Nicola Sturgeon supported the home care package that Susan Deacon announced in October. Does she understand that the £25 million for free personal care would be diverted from the funding for the home care package?

Shona Robison: That is a rather misleading statement.

I do not believe that Sir Stewart Sutherland was misleading the Parliament when he stated that the final piece of the jigsaw would cost £25 million. Most members would accept that Sir Stewart knows what he is talking about.

I will briefly refer to the amendment in the name of Richard Simpson, who either drew—or was given—the short straw. When I became a member of the Health and Community Care Committee, I was aware that a great deal of work had been done on the Sutherland report and the issue of long-term care, and I commend the committee on that work. However, when the committee reached the view that the Sutherland recommendations should be implemented in full, Richard Simpson did not want his dissent minuted, nor did he produce a minority report. Why has he now lodged an amendment that runs counter to the conclusions of the committee's report? I find his behaviour extremely disappointing.

I hope that this will be the Parliament's finest hour. As George Lyon said, although no party has a majority in its own right in the Parliament, the majority of the Parliament wants to do the right thing for the tens of thousands of elderly people and their families throughout Scotland. Today, they are waiting to see what the Parliament will do—I do not think that they will be disappointed.

Donald Gorrie: On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I am not clear whether Malcolm Chisholm was replying to the debate on behalf of the Executive or on behalf of Richard Simpson and his amendment.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Malcolm Chisholm replied on behalf of the Executive; no one replied on behalf of Richard Simpson and his amendment.

Business Motion

12:34

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Patricia Ferguson): The next item of business is consideration of motion S1M-1581, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out the business programme.

Motion moved,

That the Parliament agrees:

(a) the following programme of business—

Wednesday 31 January 2001

2.30 pm Time for Reflection - The Reverend Ernest Levy, Member of the Jewish Clergy

followed by Stage 1 Debate on the Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) (No 2) Bill

followed by Executive Debate on the Outworking Bill - UK Legislation

followed by Financial Resolution on the Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) (No 2) Bill

followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions

5.00 pm Decision Time

followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1579 Ian Jenkins: Borders Textile Industry

Thursday 1 February 2001

9.30 am Executive Debate on Working Together for Scotland - a Programme for Government

followed by Business Motion

2.30 pm Question Time

3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time

3.30 pm Executive Debate on the Strategy for Enterprise

followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions

5.00 pm Decision Time

followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1575 Roseanna Cunningham: Tayside Acute Services Review Consultation

Wednesday 7 February 2001

2.30 pm Time for Reflection

followed by Executive Debate on Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2001

followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions

5.00 pm Decision Time

followed by Members' Business

Thursday 8 February 2001

9.30 am Scottish Socialist Party and Green Party Business

followed by Business Motion

2.30 pm Question Time

3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time

3.30 pm Stage 3 Debate on the Budget (Scotland) (No 2) Bill

followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions

5.00 pm Decision Time

followed by Members' Business

(b) that the Justice 2 Committee reports to the Justice 1 Committee by 2 February 2001 on the draft Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 1986 Amendment Regulations 2001 and on the draft Advice and Assistance (Assistance by Way of Representation) (Scotland) Amendment (No 2) Regulations 2001 and that the Justice 1 Committee reports to the Justice 2 Committee by 2 February 2001 on the draft Number of Inner House Judges (Variation) Order 2001; and

(c) that Stage 1 of the Convention Rights (Compliance) (Scotland) Bill be completed by 21 March 2001.—[Tavish Scott.]

Donald Gorrie (Central Scotland) (LD): In the light of the previous two debates on road maintenance and the Sutherland report, will Mr Scott give an assurance that the Parliament will have an opportunity next week to debate any developments on those issues, to replace some of the non-event time such as the Executive debate on the strategy for enterprise?

The Deputy Presiding Officer: That is a matter for the Parliamentary Bureau, but Tavish Scott may want to reply.

The Deputy Minister for Parliament (Tavish Scott): You are right, Presiding Officer. The Parliamentary Bureau will reflect on that. However, some people think that the Executive's strategy for enterprise is important.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The question is, that motion S1M-1581 be agreed to.

Motion agreed to.

12:35

Meeting suspended until 14:30.

14:30

On resuming—

Question Time

SCOTTISH EXECUTIVE

Paper Industry

1. Lewis Macdonald (Aberdeen Central) (Lab): To ask the Scottish Executive, further to the answer to question S1W-11988 by Ms Wendy Alexander on 27 December 2000, what recent discussions it has had with representatives of the Scottish paper industry. (S1O-2848)

The Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning (Ms Wendy Alexander): I will meet representatives of the paper industry forum on 6 February.

Lewis Macdonald: The minister will be aware of the situation at Donside paper mill in my constituency. Does she recognise that the paper industry has long-term needs for investment, skills and equipment to remain competitive? Does she agree that effective co-operation between unions and management at Donside has been essential in efforts to identify a new operator for the mill? Will she make a point of meeting the Graphical, Paper and Media Union? Will she ensure that the local enterprise network continues to support Donside paper mill and the Scottish paper industry as a whole?

Ms Alexander: I am hopeful that the unions will join us at the meeting with the paper industry forum on 6 February. The unions have co-operated so far in the case of the Donside paper mill. It is encouraging for the future of the paper industry in Scotland that, despite the receivership at Donside, a number of buyers have shown an interest. It is important that Scottish Enterprise Grampian continues to co-operate in ensuring that the skill base that the paper industry requires exists here in Scotland.

Tricia Marwick (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP): The First Minister will confirm that it is not inefficiency that has resulted in the job losses at Tullis Russell or the crisis in the paper industry in Scotland. The paper industry in Scotland is imploding. Profits have dropped by £70 a tonne in the past 18 months because of the exchange rate differential. Does the minister propose to take any action to relieve that situation, or will she sit back and wring her hands in the hope that her colleagues in London—who are trusted with Scotland's economic levers—will somehow make things better?

Ms Alexander: I am not sure whether the SNP is arguing that it is not in favour of the independent setting of interest rates, which has, of course, been a key factor in bringing about stability, ending boom and bust and ensuring the competitiveness of industry as a whole. The recent weakening of sterling relative to the euro has eased pressure. There is no doubt that Scotland can be a competitive location for the paper industry. The contribution that we can make is to ensure that it is an attractive location for that industry.

Dennis Canavan (Falkirk West): Is the minister aware that the paper industry is facing its gravest crisis since Margaret Thatcher was in power, when a paper machine was closing down virtually every week and a paper mill was closing down virtually every month? Although some problems—such as an over-valued currency and the climate change levy—are not the direct responsibility of the Scottish Executive, will the minister consider arranging a summit conference so that representatives of the paper industry and appropriate trade unions can put their case to Scottish Executive ministers and UK Government ministers for an effective action plan? Otherwise, there may be no paper industry left in Scotland.

Ms Alexander: We intend to have a summit—the paper industry forum on 6 February—and the trade unions are invited. It is true that some of the pressures that the industry faces—such as the price of wood pulp—are outwith the control of the Scottish Executive and, indeed, of the industry, but I repeat that, despite the receivership at Donside, there has been a widespread expression of interest. Companies in the paper industry want to come in, take over the plant, and be involved in a growing paper industry in Scotland. We will give them every support to do so.

Disability Rights Commission (Meetings)

2. Michael Matheson (Central Scotland) (SNP): To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met the Disability Rights Commission. (S1O-2813)

The Minister for Social Justice (Jackie Baillie): The Executive is working closely with the Disability Rights Commission on a range of issues. My officials and I meet the Disability Rights Commission regularly—most recently, last week.

Michael Matheson: Is the minister aware of the Disability Rights Commission's concerns about its limited mandate to take forward legal challenges under the Disability Discrimination Act 1995 and that it has suggested proposals to extend its mandate to allow it to take up legal challenges under the Human Rights Act 1998? Does the minister support the proposal to extend the commission's mandate so as to enable it to take up challenges under the Human Rights Act 1998? If so, will she make representations to Margaret Hodge, the minister responsible at Westminster, to ensure that the commission's mandate is extended to protect the human rights of disabled people in Scotland?

Jackie Baillie: The Disability Rights Commission has not raised that matter with me but I am happy to discuss it with it. As Michael Matheson will appreciate, the commission is a UK-wide operation that reports to the Department for Education and Employment. I am sure that the department will give due consideration to the representations that are made directly by the commission.

Young Disabled People

3. Scott Barrie (Dunfermline West) (Lab): To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any plans to review the current legislation regarding young people with a disability and in receipt of respite care being classified as looked-after children. (S1O-2835)

The Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs (Mr Jack McConnell): The existing legislation provides protection and support for children who receive respite care for continuous periods of more than 24 hours. It offers a comprehensive package of care for that vulnerable group; there are no current proposals to change the legislation.

Scott Barrie: I am well aware of the Children (Scotland) Act 1995, which brought that provision into being. Is the minister aware that a large proportion of parents of children who receive respite care are disturbed that children who are looked after outwith the parental home only to help them remain in that home and because of their disability are classed as looked-after children? Those parents feel that that is inappropriate. They would prefer there to be some other way for their children to receive the protection the state provides through that classification and for it to be recognised that their children fall into a different category.

Mr McConnell: While there are no plans to review that aspect of the Children (Scotland) Act 1995, I am aware of the impression given to parents to which Mr Barrie refers. Nicol Stephen and I are looking at ways to change that impression. The measures in the 1995 act and the associated regulations exist to protect the children concerned, but it is important that a wrong impression or one that distresses children is not created, so we are looking at that to see what can be done.

Mobile Telephone Masts

4. Fiona McLeod (West of Scotland) (SNP): To ask the Scottish Executive what income from rent for the positioning of mobile telephone masts it receives from telecommunications companies. (S1O-2815)

The Minister for Environment, Sport and Culture (Mr Sam Galbraith): In the financial year 1999-2000 the Scottish Executive received approximately £39,800 from mobile telephone companies for the positioning of masts and aerials. Of that, capitalised one-off payments amounted to £34,500.

Fiona McLeod: I take it that as those masts are on public buildings that is why, in the draft consultation on national planning guidelines, only new installations of telecommunications apparatus on buildings will be subject to full planning control. That goes against recommendation 1 of the Transport and Environment Committee report:

"The Committee recommends the introduction of full planning control for telecommunications development."

Is the intention to allow the Government to continue to make money on a potential health hazard?

Mr Galbraith: It cannot be taken that the masts are on buildings; they are on land and, as such, subject to the proposals that we are putting forward. Fiona McLeod's thesis is, once again, completely and utterly wrong.

Dorothy-Grace Elder (Glasgow) (SNP): Mr Galbraith is in his usual charm-free mood. He states that some of the masts are not on buildings, but on land. Of course they are—there are even plans to raise such gigantic masts in the east end of Glasgow. Will the minister accept that many people in Scotland are alarmed by the presence of gigantic mobile phone masts? We know that the chancellor is making billions from them. Out of the money from the masts made by the Scottish Executive, will the minister commission public health inquiries to find out what degree of harm is, or is not, being done to the public?

Mr Galbraith: I know that the SNP is keen to spend money on everything, but it seems particularly ridiculous for me to spend money on the matter, because Professor Stewart has already brought out a report that concluded that the masts are not a public health hazard. Why the nationalists want to revisit the subject day after day beats me—it is probably because they have nothing else to talk about.

Timber Transportation

5. David Mundell (South of Scotland) (Con): To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions the Minister for Rural Development has had with the Minister for Transport about the extraction and transportation of timber in areas where transportation by sea or rail is not practical. (S1O-2828)

The Deputy Minister for Rural Development (Rhona Brankin): As the minister with particular responsibility for forestry, I have had several discussions with the Minister for Transport and her officials on the vital importance of good road networks in rural areas. As members will agree, those roads serve a wide variety of industries, which include forestry, agriculture and tourism. They are essential for carrying timber where transport by sea or rail is not practical.

David Mundell: I thank the minister for that reply and for meeting me and Alex Fergusson in Dumfries and Galloway, where she was able to form an appreciation of the scale of timber extraction in the area. Is the minister aware that Dumfries and Galloway Council is about to impose certain restrictions on roads and bridges for reasons that it believes are necessary to maintain the integrity of those roads? The restrictions will inevitably obstruct the free flow not only of timber traffic, but other traffic. What advice does she offer the council to address the problem of roads that cannot cope with the current timber traffic?

Rhona Brankin: As David Mundell is no doubt aware, last year, the Minister for Transport announced an extra £70 million over the next three years to tackle the backlog of repairs to local roads and bridges. Furthermore, as Mr Mundell will be aware, last Friday, the Dumfries and Galloway local timber transport group met and discussed several issues. We welcome the work that Dumfries and Galloway Council is doing on testing the strength of roads. I am aware of the need to consider the strength of roads and how we extract timber from forestry in sensitive areas. We will continue to support the work of the local timber transport groups.

Christine Grahame (South of Scotland) (SNP): Given that the Executive has turned its back on the recommendation of the Borders rail feasibility study for a further study into transporting timber from Kielder by rail and that the report states that

"The existing road route is of variable standard and in many areas is particularly unsuited to significant volumes of freight traffic,"

which of the nine proposed road improvement schemes following on that has the Minister for Transport discussed with the Deputy Minister for Rural Development?

Rhona Brankin: That is clearly not my responsibility as Deputy Minister for Rural Development; it is a matter for Sarah Boyack. However, we take the issue of timber transport very seriously. Sarah Boyack recently announced £4.4 million support to Associated British Ports to ship timber from the Kintyre peninsula to the Ayrshire coast. She also announced recently a £0.7 million award to Iggesund Paperboard to help ship timber from Lochaline. We are also considering promising railheads for development, for example in Dalmally, Rannoch in Argyll and Lockerbie and Beattock in Dumfriesshire. We are aware of the problems of timber transport and we will continue to have discussions about them.

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Patricia Ferguson): I call Dr Elaine Murray.

Dr Elaine Murray (Dumfries) (Lab): The minister has already answered my question.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Question 6 has been withdrawn.

Police (Race Relations)

7. Mr Michael McMahon (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab): To ask the Scottish Executive what action it plans to take as a result of the recent report "Without Prejudice? A Thematic Inspection of Police Race Relations in Scotland". (S1O-2842)

The Deputy Minister for Justice (Iain Gray): The recommendations of the report are primarily directed towards chief constables. The report provides an important new contribution to the work of the Stephen Lawrence inquiry steering group, which is chaired by the Deputy First Minister.

Mr McMahon: Is the minister aware that organisations representing black and minority ethnic communities have consistently raised concerns that there remains a huge gulf between the good words in official documents and the real outcomes and treatment in minority communities? Can he advise the Parliament what monitoring will take place to ensure that the good intentions of the police are translated into a new confidence among our minority communities in their treatment by the authorities?

Iain Gray: It is clear that policies must be turned into real and practical improvements. The Stephen Lawrence inquiry steering group is already working on many of the report's recommendations, including the development of comprehensive performance indicators for the police in relation to racist incidents. The key judgment on progress will come in 2002, when the inspectorate will formally follow up the report with a further inspection to ensure that progress has been real.

Phil Gallie (South of Scotland) (Con): The minister will, no doubt, agree that the adoption of the report will have considerable training implications. Has he had a chance to examine the cost and resource implications of that? If so, what will he do about it?

Iain Gray: I agree that the report expresses concerns about the lack of progress on national training. The Lawrence steering group has in the past expressed similar concerns. However, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland has now prepared its national equal opportunities training strategy and the next stage is for ACPOS to produce an action plan detailing how to turn that strategy into a reality. We look forward to examining those proposals.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Questions 8 and 9 have been withdrawn.

Adoption

10. Hugh Henry (Paisley South) (Lab): To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will review the legislation, both primary and secondary, governing the adoption of babies purchased outwith Scotland. (S1O-2847)

The Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs (Mr Jack McConnell): Yes. We will make it an offence to bring a child into Scotland unless prospective adopters have complied fully with the requirements that are prescribed in regulations. We will consult on the draft regulations shortly.

Hugh Henry: I welcome the minister's commitment. I am sure that he and everyone else in the chamber has been concerned to read recent press coverage of the scandal that is unfolding in England. Can the minister ensure that in whatever he and the Executive do, the welfare of children will be paramount and the issue will be handled with sensitivity? Notwithstanding the fact that there will be consultation, can he assure us that action will be speedy?

Mr McConnell: Yes. We will consult on the new regulations shortly. We have to do that in conjunction with our colleagues in England and Wales, because it is important that standards are set throughout the United Kingdom. We will also consult soon on national standards for adoption within the UK. Nicol Stephen and I are reviewing those and other matters, and we will make an announcement soon.

Alex Neil (Central Scotland) (SNP): I welcome the minister's announcement of the review and urgent legislation. Will he confirm that such a review, and the legislation, will tackle internet trading in babies and that that practice will be outlawed in Scotland?

Mr McConnell: First, internet trading, in common with any other trading, for babies or prospective adopted children is illegal and will remain so. John Hutton, the Minister of State at the Department of Health, is addressing the difficult matters relating to the internet. We are in consultation with him. The regulations that we need to bring into force will implement the Protection of Children Act 1999 rather than be a new act of Parliament, but they will be important regulations and developing consistency north and south of the border will ensure that, across the UK, we prevent this matter from happening again, if that is possible.

Ms Margo MacDonald (Lothians) (SNP): Can the minister give an absolute assurance that—using the terminology of the question—no baby will be "purchased" in Scotland? I am concerned by the use of the word "purchase". No loophole should be left for that.

Mr McConnell: Giving absolute assurances can be a dangerous business. If anybody in Scotland purchased, either in this country or elsewhere, a baby for adoption or for any other purpose, they would be breaking the law and action would be taken by the legal authorities as appropriate.

Minister for Health and Community Care (Meetings)

11. Miss Annabel Goldie (West of Scotland) (Con): To ask the Scottish Executive when the Minister for Health and Community Care last met representatives of Argyll and Clyde Health Board and what issues were discussed. (S1O-2814)

The Minister for Health and Community Care (Susan Deacon): My colleagues and I regularly meet representatives of all health boards and national health service trusts, including those in Argyll and Clyde. On 14 December I discussed the Scottish health plan "Our National Health: A plan for action, a plan for change" with representatives from all health boards in Scotland.

Miss Goldie: Babies—not a matter with which I am intimately familiar, minister, but none the less an important component of our society—were, I had hoped, going to feature in the minister's answer, because the minister should be aware that the maternity facility in Inverclyde royal hospital is threatened with closure because of a review that is being undertaken by Argyll and Clyde Acute Hospitals NHS Trust.

Will the minister confirm two points? Is it desirable that the review should take place when something called the national maternity services framework is floating around? Does the minister seriously consider that it is reasonable or practical to require pregnant mothers in Inverclyde to make their way from the precipitous terrain of that area to the lofty heights of the Royal Alexandra hospital in Paisley? Is that an undisclosed national Executive plan to induce labour at no expense to the national health service?

Susan Deacon: Annabel Goldie referred to the importance of babies, and I share her view. I confess to having intimate knowledge of that matter. I hope that none of us will go any further into intimate knowledge that we may have. I will stop at that point on that subject.

I assure Annabel Goldie that the national maternity services framework to which she refers is not floating around, but is completed. I think that it is at the printers and will be published shortly. I initiated that work more than a year ago to ensure that, through a fully inclusive and consultative process, staff and women could say what they think is the appropriate shape of maternity services throughout Scotland—not only in hospitals, but in the community. I understand that no decisions have been taken in Argyll and Clyde on any of the facilities that were referred to. I hope that when the national framework is published, it will provide an appropriate framework within which to take local decisions.

Mr Lloyd Quinan (West of Scotland) (SNP): Does the minister agree that the concerns and tensions in the Argyll and Clyde Health Board area about the provision of maternity services in Paisley and Greenock and at the Vale of Leven hospital, and the continuing suggestions of threat to the services in Vale of Leven and Greenock, provide us with a solution? Argyll and Clyde Health Board cannot serve the people of the area correctly, because it covers an area that makes no sense geographically. The infrastructure to take people from the Dumbarton end, the Vale of Leven end or the Argyll section of Argyll and Clyde Health Board to maternity services in Paisley or Greenock is inadequate. Ministers need to consider creating separate health boards north and south of the River Clyde.

Susan Deacon: It is interesting that Lloyd Quinan refers to the concerns and tensions that exist on such sensitive issues. He is right. They present both a challenge and a responsibility for politicians, to ensure that we address such issues helpfully and allay rather than feed concerns when possible. When major changes are taking place to review and improve health facilities, it worries me that we often hear phrases such as "threats of closure" rather than comments about the bigger picture of the service changes and improvements.

I stress again that I recognise and believe passionately that maternity services are one of the most sensitive and important services that we provide and their delivery to women has changed much over the years. We must be prepared to consider sensibly, maturely and constructively how we can provide the right configuration of services in every part of the country.

Mr Duncan McNeil (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab): Is the minister confident that the trusts that represent the area are working effectively to deliver a service that suits those who expect to use it? I have grave doubts about that, as Glasgow acute trust and Argyll and Clyde Health Board propose to base maternity services only four miles apart, with nothing thereafter between Paisley and Crosshouse hospital in Kilmarnock.

Susan Deacon: To be candid with the chamber, I think that the effectiveness of local health boards and trusts in taking matters forward is varied. Every part of the NHS is working hard to get better at consulting effectively on such issues. The Executive has made it clear that we expect far more effective discussion and decision making to take place locally.

Any discussion on the substance of service changes will be greatly informed by the publication of the national services framework. Decisions will still have to be taken locally, but the framework will set out some of the wider issues that have been raised by women about what they want from maternity services and the importance that they attribute to having a proper, woman-centred service where they can make informed choices. There will be progress on that issue in the weeks to come.

Caledonian MacBrayne (Meetings)

12. Mr Duncan Hamilton (Highlands and Islands) (SNP): To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of Caledonian MacBrayne and what issues were discussed. (S1O-2849)

The Minister for Transport (Sarah Boyack): The Scottish Executive has regular meetings and frequent exchanges with Caledonian MacBrayne on a wide range of issues relating to its delivery of lifeline services.

Mr Hamilton: I thank the minister for her very specific answer.

There was an announcement this week on the CalMac tendering process. Until this week, the minister argued that the European Commission was going to insist on the break-up of the network into at least three groups. This week, she is arguing that the network can be maintained as a unified whole. While I welcome that, I ask the minister why it has taken until now for her to take the fight to keep the unified network back to Brussels. Will she confirm whether the measures that have been announced this week will mean that CalMac vessels will remain in public ownership while the operation of the routes may fall into private hands?

Sarah Boyack: Let me be clear about why we have announced our proposals to the Commission this week. It has taken some time to analyse the feedback we got during the summer. There was an almost universal view that we needed to ensure that we retained the integrity of CalMac services. We had been told by the Commission that it did not see how we could meet the competition rules without splitting the services up into separate bundles. I have been clear from day one that we would be totally opposed to cherry-picking or splitting off the routes from CalMac.

Over the past few months, we have managed to carry out further work to consider closely the competition element of the process. Our argument to the Commission will be that to retain reliable, guaranteed, lifeline services at a good cost to the Scottish taxpayer, we think that having one network makes a lot of economic sense. How competitive the different process would be depends on which part of the ferry industry we ask. Splitting it up into lots of individual routes makes sense for localised ferry operators, but we are arguing that—within the Commission's own rules—there is scope for ensuring that we have an integrated network that lets us deal with fares and reliability. We will push that case strongly with the Commission.

Maureen Macmillan (Highlands and Islands) (Lab): I am glad that the minister is promoting single bids for the entirety of the CalMac network. That is universally welcomed by anybody who has the west Highlands at heart. How can back-bench MSPs, MEPs and councillors help to convince the EC of the rightness of that decision? Will the minister ensure that the specification in the bid ensures that the vessels are operated to the highest standards, by crew who are familiar with west Highland waters? Will she consider writing into the contract the requirement for partnership working between crew and company?

Sarah Boyack: Maureen Macmillan's point is interesting and important. Over the past few months, a series of different organisations representing communities, trade unions and councils have engaged with Brussels and worked with the Executive to propose a coherent case to the Commission. As a result of that, we have seen evidence of more flexibility in the Commission. I am keen for that process to continue. If back-bench MSPs and MEPs are happy to work with us on that, I would be happy to work with them. In fact, I had a videoconference with an all-party delegation of MEPs in Brussels this week. It was extremely useful for getting the message across and I received positive feedback from the MEPs.

Specifications are critical to fares, safety and guaranteed routes. The specification process and the process of consultation will be vital. All the points that Maureen Macmillan raised are key issues for that consultation process.

George Lyon (Argyll and Bute) (LD): Given how critical it is to make a coherent case in Brussels, will the minister take this up with the Commission when she is out there?

Sarah Boyack: I am going out there as soon as I can find a space in my diary. George Lyon will know that a number of other meetings, in which he was involved, took up my time yesterday, but I was able to speak to people in a videoconference. I intend to follow that up with MEPs and with the Commission directly. It is important to get our case across coherently and I am happy to work with people over the next few weeks and months to ensure that we do precisely that.

There has already been some flexibility, particularly on the application of the mainland-to-mainland routes. In Scotland, mainland-to-mainland routes are like mainland-to-island routes; the alternative of travelling very long distances, as George Lyon knows from his constituency, means that we must make a strong, robust case. We have started to do that with the Commission and I look forward to the support of members in continuing that process.

Scottish Berry Project

13. Irene McGugan (North-East Scotland) (SNP): To ask the Scottish Executive how and when it plans to take forward a cross-sectoral project that reflects the aims of the Scottish berry project. (S1O-2817)

The Minister for Rural Development (Ross Finnie): Scottish ministers have offered to consider funding a pilot project and we await a submission from the Scottish berry group. It is my understanding that the group intends to submit a proposal by the end of the month.

Irene McGugan: I suggest that the only thing that the proposed pilot project in Govan has in common with the Tayside-led consortium is the name. I remind the minister that a business plan for the project was first submitted in 1998. How much more time does he need to consider it? Time is something that we just do not have.

Can the minister deny that we are in immediate danger of losing the berry industry in Scotland? Does he dispute that our rates of chronic heart disease are the highest in western Europe and that research has proved that increased consumption of fruit and vegetables can help to reduce that? Will he finally and unequivocally commit to a meaningful cross-sectoral approach to resourcing the Scottish berry project, which would benefit both rural Scotland and the health of the nation? Or is the Joseph Rowntree Foundation's report correct to state that, in the face of overwhelming support for a national berry project, the only thing stopping it is lack of political will?

Ross Finnie: In May last year, I clearly indicated to the Scottish Soft Fruit Growers Association—try saying that quickly—that I was very much behind the project. I deeply regret the fact that negotiations between the berry project organisers and the association broke down. In recent months, we have decided to try again and get more parties to agree. Indeed, John Swinney has been in correspondence with me on the subject. The Govan project has come forward from the association and the Scottish berry group itself has promoted the project. I do not think that it is for me to dictate to the berry group what that pilot project should be.

Although Irene McGugan makes valid points about the reports and Scotland's health record, some of the hypothesis surrounding how such projects would work has yet to be tested. Before we commit full expenditure to the project, we should test that hypothesis. I very much hope that the project, proposals for which are due to land on my desk at the end of the month, will be viable and that we can press ahead with it as soon as possible.

Roads (Signposting)

14. Euan Robson (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD): To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any plans to review the criteria for the installation of tourist signposting on trunk roads. (S1O-2853)

The Minister for Transport (Sarah Boyack): The Scottish Executive has no plans to review the criteria for the installation of tourist signposting on trunk roads.

Euan Robson: Does the minister accept that there are often conflicts between tourist signing policy on trunk roads and signing policy on local authority roads, as was recently seen on the A68 near Jedburgh and the A7 south-west of Hawick? Does she accept that that is another reason to consider detrunking some routes with ring-fenced resources?

Sarah Boyack: I certainly do not want to get into a debate in the chamber about detrunking routes. The subject would be of huge interest and a lot of people could be alarmed at the prospect. The process was reviewed in 1998, which is quite a recent review of our approach to trunk road signing policy. The consultation process for that review involved the Scottish Tourist Board, the area tourist boards, local enterprise companies, planning authorities, local road and traffic authorities, tourist attraction operators and Scottish Natural Heritage. A wide range of people were involved in that process quite a short time ago. I am keen to examine the operation of the policy and to see that it is effective, but it is a bit early now to begin to review the policy.

Mr Andrew Welsh (Angus) (SNP): Is the minister aware of the tremendous efforts that are being made to provide tourist attractions of the highest quality in Angus, Dundee and the adjacent areas of Perthshire? In view of those efforts, can she tell us why there is no signposting whatsoever on the Friarton bridge to direct tourists and travellers to the Angus coastal tourist route and to Dundee? Will she rectify the situation?

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I ask members to keep the background noise down and to show some respect for the people who are speaking.

Sarah Boyack: It is our general policy not to have a proliferation of signs in any given place, which would have implications for safety on our trunk roads and motorways. I am happy to write to Mr Welsh about the issue that he has raised. It seems to me to be a local issue, and I would prefer to give him a proper detailed answer in writing.

Mr John McAllion (Dundee East) (Lab): If the minister sees a signpost on the trunk roads showing her a way out, will she please take it?

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I do not think that that is particularly relevant.

Transport (Aberdeen)

15. Richard Lochhead (North-East Scotland) (SNP): I am tempted to repeat the previous question.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to alleviate recent transport difficulties in the city of Aberdeen. (S1O-2822)

The Minister for Transport (Sarah Boyack): This is primarily a matter for Aberdeen City Council, which has now agreed remedial measures with Cala Homes Ltd to reopen the Grandholm bridge. For our part, the Executive has been pressing ahead urgently with planned traffic improvements on the A90, including the extra slipway on the southbound carriageway, to improve access to the Bridge of Don park and ride.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I must again ask members to keep the background noise down. Members at the back are having difficulty hearing what is being said.

Richard Lochhead: I appeal to the minister to stop passing the buck. Will she explain why she was able last week to announce a £245 million package for the northern extension of the M74 but unable to offer anything to address the current transport difficulties in Aberdeen? I suggest that the minister joins the First Minister on his visit to Aberdeen a week tomorrow to experience at first hand the gridlock, which causes so much misery for so many families and people who are just trying to drop the kids off at school or to get to work each day. Will the minister undertake to participate in the near future in a public meeting with the council to discuss her transport policies? Given that 2,500 people turned out at the public meeting two weeks ago, I can guarantee her a huge audience.

Sarah Boyack: It is important to acknowledge that we are already working with Aberdeen City Council. The member will know the route of the A90 and will know just how critical congestion in Aberdeen is. We are concerned, which is why Executive officials were in Aberdeen last week, talking to the city council and seeing how we can work in partnership to ensure that we do not get gridlock. There are particular difficulties in Aberdeen—I am sure that Richard Lochhead is well aware of them. The massive turnout at the meeting in Aberdeen demonstrates the extent to which there is frustration about congestion. I reassure the member that, through our allocation of £70 million to local authorities for their roads and bridges, we are showing that we are concerned that local authorities should be able to invest in their transport infrastructure. The work that we are doing in partnership with local authorities will be critical in ensuring that the work that we do on the A90 is in tune with the local transport strategy for Aberdeen.

Elaine Thomson (Aberdeen North) (Lab): I look forward to welcoming my friend the minister to Aberdeen in the near future, where she will no doubt continue discussions with partners in the north-east Scotland economic development partnership on how the current plan for a modern transport system for Aberdeen and the north-east can be implemented. Does she agree that, although the SNP has promised everyone across Scotland millions of pounds of transport investment while declining to prioritise anything, the real way forward is through the Scottish Executive and local partners working together to identify transport priorities and agreeing how to fund them?

Sarah Boyack: I could not agree more with the member. Our plans are costed; they are programmed and are capable of being implemented. I met the north-east Scotland economic development partnership because I was keen to meet people who are involved in economic development on the ground and in the councils. Their views are critical. I am well aware that they are working up plans for Aberdeen and the north-east and I am keen to meet them again in the near future. I have ensured that our officials are in regular contact with them; indeed, they meet them at every meeting of the partnership to make absolutely sure that the Executive is fully involved in the development of a modern integrated transport network for the north-east of Scotland and for Aberdeen.

Mr David Davidson (North-East Scotland) (Con): The minister mentioned that £70 million was to go to local authorities. How much of that has been earmarked for Aberdeen and how much has Aberdeen City Council asked the Executive for by way of support?

Sarah Boyack: The £70 million that my colleague Angus MacKay announced before Christmas is part of the local authority settlement. It will therefore be distributed to local authorities equitably; it will be up to the local authorities to ensure that they prioritise the greatest needs in their area. The member will know from correspondence that there are a host of pressing issues in his area; I hope that the money will be of great assistance to councils in advancing local bridge and road projects where urgent investment is required.

First Minister's Question Time

SCOTTISH EXECUTIVE

Scottish Executive Priorities

1. Mr John Swinney (North Tayside) (SNP): To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Executive's main priorities currently are. (S1F-799)

The First Minister (Henry McLeish): The main priorities for the Scottish Executive will be laid out in the new programme for government, which will be announced in the near future.

Mr Swinney: The First Minister will be aware that a royal commission was set up in December 1997 to review the long-term care of the elderly. There was then a review of the royal commission, a rejection of the royal commission and a review of that rejection. Last week, the First Minister said:

"John Swinney asks me to stop having review after review . . . There is only one review—the one that has been undertaken by Susan Deacon".—[Official Report, 18 January 2001; Vol 10, c 427.]

The Minister for Health and Community Care has announced the outcome of that review—that there will be another review. For the avoidance of doubt, will the First Minister—on his first appearance in Parliament since that announcement—explain to Parliament and to the people of Scotland whether, in principle, he supports the universal payment of the personal care costs of all elderly people in Scotland?

The First Minister: The Executive outlined its case yesterday. In each constituency, there will be people who suffer from dementia or cancer, or who have been stroke victims, who expect me—as the head of an Administration and as a member of this Parliament—to do the very best for them.

The great tragedy about yesterday was that people ignored the fact that we were setting up a radical process to ensure that the commitments that we had made would be honoured. That process includes a new definition of need, an implementation group—not a review—a commitment on resources, a bill in this Parliament and a timetable to take the matter forward. Motions and amendments to take forward the issue of free personal care for all are before the chamber today. It is important that we wait until 5 o'clock to see what decision is made—that makes sense for me at the dispatch box and it would make sense for the chamber.

Mr Swinney: Is not the tragedy of yesterday that the First Minister raised expectations in Scotland and then let people down? Is he intent on defying public opinion and the opinions of Alzheimer Scotland, Age Concern Scotland, Help the Aged and the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care—at least, when he was a member of the Health and Community Care Committee? Is he intent on defying the views of the Conservative group, the Liberal Democrat group, the SNP group, the Scottish Socialist Party, the Greens and Mr Canavan? When is the Labour minority in this Parliament going to accept the majority opinion of Scotland and Scotland's Parliament?

The First Minister: It is worth repeating the point that three months ago the debate on free personal care was off the agenda—[Interruption.] It was off the agenda in that a community care package had been identified and brought before the Parliament. I have made long-term care for our older people one of the highest priorities on the agenda of the media and this Parliament; I make no apologies for doing so. What is crucial is that I remain committed to and will deliver on the pledges that I have made.

We have talked about raising expectations. Again, I make no apologies on that, because we will deliver on the high expectations that Scots have for our country. I have no doubt that yesterday's statement and this evening's vote will vindicate the decision to put the issue at centre stage and to allow the Parliament to judge how far and how quickly we can go.

Mr Swinney: The First Minister may say that the issue was off the agenda in October, but that is not terribly consistent with what the Minister for Health and Community Care told Parliament this morning. The issue is back on the agenda because the First Minister put it there and, by doing so, raised expectations that it is commonly believed have not been met.

If, at 5 pm, Parliament votes in favour of the motion in my name, we will have entered interesting constitutional territory. The only other time we have been in such territory was on the issue of tuition fees. On 7 October 1999, the late First Minister was asked:

"If the Parliament votes that tuition fees should go, is that it? Do they go?"

The late First Minister replied:

"Of course. I can't defy Parliament."

If my motion is carried at 5 pm, will this First Minister defy Parliament? If it was wrong to defy Parliament in connection with tuition fees, is it wrong to do the same tonight?

The First Minister: I want to be very specific on this point. As I—along with representatives from John Swinney's party, the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats—was an architect of the Parliament's procedures, I must say that the voice of the Parliament cannot and will not be ignored. Let me go further than that and say that we will listen to what the Parliament has to say and we will respond clearly and decisively.

Tommy Sheridan (Glasgow) (SSP): Does the First Minister accept that the answer that he has just given is not satisfactory? Everyone is worried that, if he loses tonight's vote, he will announce another review. Instead of doing that, will he tell us that, if he loses tonight's vote democratically, he will unequivocally announce the implementation of universal free personal care? That is what we want.

The First Minister: I cannot be any clearer when I say that I, as First Minister, will not ignore the will of the Parliament. We have another hour and 30 minutes before we get the result of that vote; it is important that we wait until then.

Yesterday's package should be considered. Although there is a debate about how far and how quickly we are moving on this issue, we are now proposing to make in 14 months the biggest ever step forward in long-term care. However, I believe that members from all parts of the chamber genuinely feel that sufferers in Scotland want to be taken seriously. That is why I say again to Tommy Sheridan that the will of the Parliament will not be ignored when the result of the vote is announced.

John Young (West of Scotland) (Con): Speaking as an older member, I ask the First Minister whether, if tonight's vote goes against the Labour Executive and the Labour group in the chamber, he will accept that vote and try to implement the recommendations or whether he will be immediately on the phone to Westminster to find out what Gordon Brown or Tony Blair has to say. Furthermore, has a deal been cobbled together with certain Liberal Democrats over tonight's vote?

The First Minister: John Young might say that he is getting older, but the only thing that distinguishes the two of us is that I have slightly more hair on the top of my head than he has. [Interruption.] That was not an agist attack on the member.

I will repeat the comments that I made to Tommy Sheridan and John Swinney: the Parliament's will will not be ignored. When the Parliament speaks this evening, my Administration and I—not London or anyone else—will decide what happens in the interests of older people in Scotland. The Scottish Parliament will ask the question; we will be in a position to deliver on the verdict. I cannot be any clearer.

Secretary of State for Scotland (Meetings)

2. David McLetchie (Lothians) (Con): I congratulate Mrs Helen Liddell on her appointment as Secretary of State for Scotland, although I suspect that, after the general election, she will have set a record as the shortest-serving holder of that office.

To ask the First Minister—before he misses the opportunity to do so—when he next plans to meet the Secretary of State for Scotland and what issues he intends to raise. (S1F-794)

The First Minister (Henry McLeish): Like David McLetchie, I extend warm greetings to Helen Liddell in her new post. We believe in the union and we are happy to have a Secretary of State for Scotland working for our interests at Westminster—unlike SNP members, who use the Scottish Parliament to undermine Westminster but send their ex-leader back home to do the business. We welcome Helen Liddell's appointment and look forward to working closely with her in everything that she is doing on behalf of Scotland. I shall therefore ensure that the Secretary of State for Scotland and I meet in the very near future.

David McLetchie: The new Secretary of State for Scotland got her job only because Peter Mandelson had to resign from his over a deception too far. That should be a salutary lesson for the First Minister, because he has been guilty of serial deception on the Sutherland report since the day and hour that he became First Minister.

Back on 5 November, The Sunday Times headline was: "McLeish in U-turn on elderly care". On 11 December, the Daily Record headline was: "McLeish U-turn on free care for old folk". On new year's day, the headline was: "Free care for old folk"—again in the Daily Record. If all those reports were wrong, how many times did the First Minister's office contact the journalists concerned to ask that those inaccuracies be corrected? Why did he allow so many people to be so badly misled for so long?

The First Minister: I remain committed to the points that have been raised by David McLetchie. Expectations should be high. The inference is being made that the expectations that have been raised will not be met by this Administration or by the Scottish Parliament, but nothing could be further from the truth.

I make a plea over the heads of the Conservatives to everyone in Scotland who is looking to me, to this Administration and to the Scottish Parliament to deliver real help for care needs, no matter where they are in Scotland. I repeat publicly and unequivocally that we will honour the commitments that we have made. The inference is that we should not have expectations, but we should have them. Moreover, expectations that are raised should be satisfied—we will do that.

David McLetchie: After all this time of commissions, reviews, responses and re-examinations, all that we are getting is another development group—and another seven months will go by. We are still no further forward on the key issue of principle; there is only more delay.

The First Minister likes to tell us that he leads a Government. Well, Governments govern and Governments make decisions. After all this time, all the reviews and all the examinations, why will he not make a clear decision in principle now and allow his development group to carry out its work within a clear policy framework? Why will he not decide now and tell us now?

The First Minister: We answered the question earlier about the right of the Parliament to make that important decision this evening.

Yesterday, in the debate on long-term care, David McLetchie asked about the 7,000 to 8,000 Scots who have to meet the full costs of their personal care. He asked Susan Deacon, the Minister for Health and Community Care, how much that would cost those 7,000 people. The simple point—which even Sutherland appreciated—is this: Sutherland's work was unfinished business. We are setting up the development group; we are committing resources; we are committing legislation; and, of course, we are committing ourselves to a timetable. That is vital. Even a cynic such as David McLetchie, who sits and preaches on help for the elderly after 20 years of Tory Government, should understand that. We can stomach a great deal, but he should be slightly patient. I reiterate the commitment that we will move forward.

Business (Transport Links)

3. Janis Hughes (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab): To ask the First Minister what plans the Scottish Executive has to assist business by improving transport links between Scotland and the rest of the UK. (S1F-804)

The First Minister (Henry McLeish): Efficient and reliable transport links with the rest of the UK are vital for Scotland's economic success. The M74 is a modern, safe road and, as announced on Monday, we are to complete the final five miles through Glasgow. We are working with the UK Government on improvements to the east and west coast rail links and on the review of airports.

Janis Hughes: I welcome the First Minister's answer. As someone who lobbied long and hard on the issue of the M74, I am absolutely delighted with this week's announcement. However, does the First Minister agree that this morning's debate about trunk road maintenance contracts demonstrated a high level of concern across the chamber? Will he assure me that he and his ministers will continue to explore the issues raised, including whether to delay the signing of the contracts until the issues are resolved?

The First Minister: I respect and acknowledge the concerns that were expressed in the debate in the Parliament this morning about the trunk roads contracting programme. Obviously, the procurement process is governed by contractual and legal obligations. However, when we find that concerns are being expressed by members from all parts of the chamber on an issue, it is incumbent on me to reflect on that issue. I assure Janis Hughes that we will continue to explore the issues that have been raised about the contracts.

Because of our concerns, we have agreed and published the tenders but we have not let the contracts. As a consequence of that, an audit is being done in relation to the quantities issue. At the end of the day, we want quality and value for money. The financial differences between the options are quite explicit. However, the Parliament has spoken this morning and I will be delighted to discuss the issue further with Sarah Boyack and other members of the Parliament to ensure that members' concerns are listened to and that everything humanly possible is done to address them.

Bruce Crawford (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP): The feeling of the Parliament this morning was that the tendering process should be delayed and that the Transport and the Environment Committee should conduct an inquiry. Will the First Minister give the Parliament an absolute guarantee that the tendering process will be halted and that the Transport and the Environment Committee will be able to discuss what has gone wrong and report on that to the Parliament?

The First Minister: I am trying to be as helpful as I can. Bruce Crawford appreciates as well as anyone else that we are in a procurement process. I cannot say things about the process to the Parliament that I cannot deliver. I can, however, say this: we have not let the contracts. We are considering everything that the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and political groups are saying. Today, as an act of good faith, I want to reflect on this morning's debate. It is not in the interests of the Parliament or the Executive for there to be the kind of rancour, mistrust and concerns that were expressed this morning. I cannot be specific, but I am sure that Bruce Crawford hears what I am saying and understands that I want to discuss the matters further.

Expenditure Commitments

4. Andrew Wilson (Central Scotland) (SNP): To ask the First Minister whether any existing expenditure commitments will be cut to pay for new commitments on health and education spending and, if so, what these are. (S1F-795)

The First Minister (Henry McLeish): More than £60 billion is available to the Executive over the next three years. That is capable of funding our priorities of better health services and better education. We will review our budgets, as every part of the Government does, to ensure that they are better targeted and that we make the best use of every pound in every programme. The Minister for Finance and Local Government will shortly announce details of the group on best value and budget review. Its work will identify the extra resources needed to fund our additional and new commitments.

Andrew Wilson: May I suggest to the First Minister that he announces today that finance is not a constraint on the full implementation of the Sutherland report? He could save £5 million by not going through with the appointment of Helen Liddell as Secretary of State for Scotland. I understand that the First Minister welcomed her appointment last night with all the enthusiasm of European villagers awaiting the arrival of Attila the Hun.

Is the First Minister aware that the Sutherland report could be fully implemented by using only half the money that was allocated to the annual reserve commitments—the money that is to be put aside and not spent—made by Angus MacKay in his budget?

The First Minister: When the implementation group is set up, many of Mr Wilson's comments can be passed on to its members. I am sure that the Minister for Finance and Local Government will also be grateful for the assistance that Mr Wilson seeks to give.

Given that Mr Wilson also made some fairly flippant remarks, I should point out that we are still waiting for the Scottish National Party to start talking about policies at all. We were promised that, when the new leader took over, the party would have a review process. It then had a massive get-together at Hampden Park—from which nothing emerged. We know that it will draw up a manifesto, but that will be the first manifesto in history to be drawn up with no policies. The SNP lectures us on where we might find money, but we would like to help it to find some policies on which it might fight an election.

Budget (Scotland) (No 2) Bill: Stage 1

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Mr George Reid): The next item of business is a stage 1 debate on motion S1M-1574, in the name of Angus MacKay, on the Budget (Scotland) (No 2) Bill. I ask members who wish to speak in the debate to press their request-to-speak buttons now, and for members who are leaving the chamber to do so quickly and quietly.

15:32

The Minister for Finance and Local Government (Angus MacKay): You will understand, Presiding Officer, if I approach this speech with slight nervousness, considering recent events. I have read this morning's newspapers in full, however, and I am satisfied that no details of my speech have been reported in any of the newspaper articles around the resignation of Peter Mandelson.

This has been the first full year of the budget process as set out by the financial issues advisory group and adopted by the Parliament. I acknowledge that, in the first year, the budget process has had its complications. It was the first full year of a new process, so it was always likely that some difficulties would be experienced. Some were merely teething difficulties, and involved sorting out the best way to provide information, but some were more fundamental. For example, the timing of the budget process as described by FIAG did not sit well with the timing of the United Kingdom spending review. I have agreed to examine the difficulty caused by that.

It was an unusual year for other reasons. There was a major change in the accounting basis, with a shift from cash to accrual. There was also a spending review. Nevertheless, I think it fair to say that it has been a year of achievement. We implemented a consultative budget process which achieved a genuine degree of engagement with the wider public. That is not solely an Executive achievement—it directly reflects the very hard work of the Finance Committee. I wish to place on record my thanks to that committee for its effort and for the constructive attitude of its members.

The year has been extremely fruitful: the Chancellor of the Exchequer's excellent stewardship of the UK economy and prudent handling of public finances have greatly benefited Scotland and the UK. The Budget (Scotland) (No 2) Bill highlights those achievements and goes on to reflect the record level of public expenditure.

The spending review provided increased expenditure of £800 million in 2001-02, of £1.9 billion in 2002-03, and of £3 billion in 2003-04. That will substantially increase the resources available for core programmes in the period to 2003-04. Spending on health will increase by 15 per cent, on justice by 13 per cent, on transport by 45 per cent, on education, arts and sport by 17 per cent, and on communities by 20 per cent. Those significant increases will have a direct impact on the lives of everybody in Scotland.

I have no doubt that we will hear siren voices claiming that public expenditure has fallen as a proportion of this or that, and making other criticisms. The fact remains that the spending review provides for a record level of public spending in Scotland. That means that more money will be devoted to meeting the most pressing needs of the Scottish people. It means more spending on health care, further improvement in a variety of critical infrastructure, and more progress on the social justice agenda.

Those priorities are directly reflected in the Budget (Scotland) (No 2) Bill, which was introduced on 19 January. It reflects our commitment to using all the resources of the Scottish Executive to meet the needs of the Scottish people. Meeting the essential needs of the nation must be about far more than simply attempting to allocate sensibly the additional money that we received through the spending review. It must be about spending the entire Scottish Executive budget in a manner that meets more of the Scottish people's needs. Meeting more of those needs requires us to understand them better and to squeeze every last drop out of public expenditure.

We must continue the consultation process—seeking people's views and engaging them more fully in the budget process—and I am determined to build on the start we made last year. The Executive is also determined to ensure that every pound in the budget is spent efficiently and effectively. That is why, in his statement to Parliament on 20 September 1999, my predecessor announced our intention to establish best value in Scottish Executive spending. Next week, I will make available details of a new initiative that will focus on achieving better use of public expenditure by reviewing the output of public spending—what it delivers—and assessing whether that pattern of spending meets the key priorities of the Administration. Over time, that detailed scrutiny will assess all parts of all spending programmes.

I will announce a detailed implementation plan in due course. It is important that detailed scrutiny is built on a variety of factors. First, there must be inputs from internal expertise. We need access to existing sources of advice, such as published reports, and we must look beyond those sources for external assistance in scrutinising what we do and trying to achieve best value. Therefore, I intend to establish a high-level group, which will examine all spending programmes. It will provide the essential function of challenging how we deliver best value.

We must also review and improve our performance targets and reporting. We are under a duty to include targets in the budget. I accept that so far the targets in our documents have been of variable quality and have not been strong enough. They attracted criticism from the subject committees last year. That is a further area in which the Finance Committee can make a strong contribution. We must work together to improve our targets and their presentation.

We must also shift targets from measuring inputs, which has been the traditional and accepted method of assessing progress, to measuring outputs and outcomes. Although that might seem a relatively small change, it has massive implications for the budgeting process and for our ability to conduct meaningful scrutiny. I do not underestimate the difficulty that is involved in that change, but I believe that it will deliver lasting benefits for the budget process. I would gratefully welcome the Finance Committee's assistance on that.

Our initiatives on targets and on a budget review should be seen in the wider context of a programme to modernise government at every level. Last month, Susan Deacon launched the Scottish health plan, a key aim of which is to build efficient and effective decision making that is responsive to local need. Last week, I attempted to announce a wide-ranging review of public bodies sponsored by the Scottish Executive. That quasi-announced review will reach its conclusion in May. On 18 December, we announced a further round of modernising grants to support innovative projects aimed at improving service delivery across public services. Best value and those initiatives together highlight my determination and that of the Executive to make every pound of public expenditure work harder for every person in Scotland.

Andrew Wilson (Central Scotland) (SNP): Will the minister give way?

Angus MacKay: I will not give way as I am about to finish.

I believe that the Budget (Scotland) (No 2) Bill reflects not only a record level of public expenditure, but the Executive's determination to make that expenditure genuinely work harder for all Scottish people. I commend the bill to the chamber.

I move,

That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Budget (Scotland) (No 2) Bill.

15:41

Andrew Wilson (Central Scotland) (SNP): The SNP will not obstruct the course of the Budget (Scotland) (No 2) Bill at this stage. However, the debate comes at an opportune time and I hope that when he sums up the minister will use that opportunity to address some of the questions that we will raise.

I begin with a minor whinge: I did not have an opportunity to see the document "Scotland's Budget Documents 2001-02" until 1 o'clock today, despite the fact that the minister's letter to the convener of the Finance Committee said that it was distributed on Tuesday. A copy has yet to arrive on my desk and I was able to obtain a copy from the Scottish Parliament information centre only at lunch time, when it was delivered to SPICe. I make that point simply because it is not easy to read a 264-page document in an hour. Perhaps we could have had a more topical debate if we had been able to go through that document. For example, at page 100, we would have been able to find out about the 13 per cent cut in capital allocations for school buildings. It would have been helpful to debate wee things like that.

We have had a few more amusing and pretentious Executive briefings to gawp at in awe in the past week. We have heard that the Government is not the Executive and today we heard about an Administration. Then there was the ill-fated idea of projecting the head of the glorious leader on to a screen—we can thank our lucky stars that that idea never came to fruition.

I draw members' attention to an interesting article in The Sunday Times this week. I assume that those who brief the press on behalf of the minister gave the newspaper a front-page exclusive. The article said:

"A powerful new ministry modelled on Whitehall's Treasury is to be created in Edinburgh by Henry McLeish in a move that will reinforce the first minister's authority"—

that should have been followed by the word "sic" in brackets—

"over the Scottish Government.

The principle of a Scottish chancellery"—

no less—

"has already been discussed by the coalition cabinet. It will radically alter the shape of the devolved administration, placing an unprecedented degree of influence in the hands of Angus Mackay."

"Scottish chancellery", "powerful", "modelled on Whitehall's Treasury" and "unprecedented . . . influence"—just what is that all about? We can assume only that modelling such a ministry on the Treasury is more of a reflection on the furnishings and fittings in draughty Whitehall offices than on those in the modern Victoria Quay. We hope that the pool in Victoria Quay is not to be removed.

Of course, that article was absolute nonsense—it was not true. If Mr MacKay was to become first lord of a Scottish chancellery and control a Scottish treasury, he would be the only chancellor who ran a treasury with no power. Only half of the taxes that are raised in Scotland are spent by the Parliament. We have no power to alter the nation's taxes except marginally, no power to borrow and no power to do anything beyond dividing by 10 whatever Gordon Brown announces on spending.

Angus MacKay: Will the member give way?

Andrew Wilson: I will give way to the chancellor.

Angus MacKay: I want to provide Mr Wilson with some assistance. The Sunday Times article to which he refers specifically quoted a statement from Mr McLeish which said that we would not be setting up a Scottish treasury. I invite Mr Wilson to move on to the next part of his speech.

Andrew Wilson: It is no news to the chamber—not even this afternoon—that Mr McLeish would brief the press and then deny it. A reasonable point to make is that one cannot brand one's way into effective government without substance. I will quote directly a senior source, who said:

"Mr MacKay will mirror the role of Gordon Brown by judging financial arguments advanced by each spending department."

How innovative is that? Whatever will the Minister for Finance and Local Government think of next? What has the Executive been doing since 1999? It is evident that that new approach will reinforce the First Minister's grip on ministers' spending—I assume that it is the same grip that lost the First Minister the arguments over Sutherland in the Cabinet. However, there will be no splits, as the same senior source—I assume that Angus MacKay knows who that source is—said:

"Colleagues have signed up to the general principle of better use of money."

What absolutely terrific news—that is certainly a principle on which we can all move forward. Was there a Cabinet battle over the general principle of the better use of money? Who within the Cabinet was arguing for the worst use of money? Let us have names named, and see who are the villains of the piece.

I realise that most of that is flim-flam—[MEMBERS: "Surely not."] I have good reason. Give me time. The substance of the briefing related to the need to find money for Sutherland. I would like the minister to tell me not just the implications of yesterday's announcements, but what he can do—I will give him some suggestions—to pay for full implementation, in the event of Parliament voting the way that it intends later this afternoon.

The minister has shown what can only be described as changing and unusual views on the question of a reserve. That finds its way into the Executive document, including an annual reserve allocated out of expenditure, as opposed to stock. Will he confirm that the £53 million that it is planned to allocate to the reserve in 2002 is enough to pay more than twice for the full implementation of Sutherland? Will he confirm that the underspend of one fifth in the health budget would be enough to pay for Sutherland?

Angus MacKay: Andrew Wilson today, and one of his colleagues yesterday, suggested not only that we should implement in full Sutherland's proposals on free personal care, but that we should fund it from the reserve. As he knows, the reserve is not a recurring line in the budget. What he is saying is that we should provide a bit of personal care, when we can afford it, year on year—almost as though we should use any spare change in our pockets. The reserve is not recurring.

Andrew Wilson: That is a remarkable thing to say, and it brings us to the substance of the debate. The minister, given that he is a minister, should know about such things, but he is absolutely wrong in that statement. I will quote from the Finance Committee meeting on 20 November in Aberdeen. I asked Dr Collings, the minister's chief adviser, whether the reserve was a stock or a flow. The minister's previous statement implies that it is a stock, and not an annual flow of expenditure. Dr Collings said:

"The reserve is the difference between the departmental expenditure limit . . . and the total departmental expenditure limits for each programme . . . In that sense, the reserve is a flow".—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 20 November 2000; c 896.]

Pages 6 and 7 of the budget plan that the minister outlined in the autumn show that, each year, he allocates total expenditure. Within total expenditure—not as a running total, but within actual allocated total expenditure—we find £53 million after £53 million, building up the total stock of the reserve. In the event of the minister's advisers arriving to advise him, he should nip up to the back of the chamber and find out whether he is as wrong as he sounds.

In reality, and this is my point, enough money is set aside in the budget to pay for the full implementation of Sutherland. Therefore, the idea that paying for it would put a financial restraint on the budget is absolutely absurd. As I say, one seventeenth of the entire underspend of last year's budget alone would be enough to pay for full implementation of Sutherland—one seventeenth of what the Government found in the budget but was unable to allocate would be enough.

Dr Richard Simpson (Ochil) (Lab): We must nail a myth. A supposition is growing that Sutherland is infallible. I have great respect for him and his report, but when he says that only £25 million has to be found, he is wrong. Substantially more will be required. For Mr Wilson to refer—rather glibly, if I may say so—to the reserve being used is inappropriate.

Andrew Wilson: I appreciate the member's point, but prior to this year there was no reserve. Then, all of a sudden, out of nowhere, and despite what the previous Minister for Finance was quoted as saying, we have a reserve, which is allocated annually and not, as Mr MacKay implies, as a one-off. It is allocated annually within the budget statement. All I am saying is that there is great scope in public finances—within that reserve alone—to allocate £25 million, or up to £50 million if that was the cost. The point is that the money is there. There is no financial constraint, only a policy or political constraint. That is the germane point.

I look forward with great expectation to hearing more about the points that Angus MacKay made on squeezing best value out of the Government's budget. We brought those proposals to the debate with varying degrees of success before the Scottish election. If I were allowed to offer Angus MacKay the SNP's advice on the budget process, I would be delighted to do so, through the Finance Committee or more privately.

There is an interesting debate to be had in the next stages of the budget bill, once we have had the chance to look at the details—and my colleagues will be considering things in detail. However, a budget without the ability to raise and allocate taxation revenues is no budget at all. That is why Scottish budgets are reported with all the excitement of the shipping forecast—look at the press gallery now.

The Parliament has fewer financial powers than any other Parliament on earth. That is the reality of devolution under Labour. We have record cash spending, but less of the nation's wealth has been allocated to public spending even than under the Tories. The outcomes of that are that NHS waiting lists are higher, homelessness is at record levels and there are fewer police on the streets under Labour than under the Conservatives. Those are the outcomes that the Minister for Finance and Local Government will have to examine in the coming months—that is what the budgets of Labour Administrations have delivered. If we are to make progress—and I hope we do—we must get into the detail of what Scotland can achieve, which is far, far more than the limited budgets we have at present.

15:50

Mr David Davidson (North-East Scotland) (Con): The minister will be relieved to know that, like the SNP, we will not obstruct the budget at this stage. I appreciate the title, Minister for Finance and Local Government. At least it is honest. The Executive's method of financing local councils has been to take over how councils spend their money: ring fencing is a take-over by any other name. New Labour has not changed its spots—central control is alive and well, despite the demise of Mr Mandelson. Perhaps Mr MacKay should recall his days as finance convener of Edinburgh's council and remember the freedom he enjoyed to serve the citizens of Edinburgh. Why is he denying that privilege to Scottish councils of all varieties? By the time councils deal with the ring fencing that is coming through the Executive's budget process, they are left with very little room for manoeuvre. Roads maintenance, cleansing, litter control and leisure and recreation are the only areas left for manoeuvre, unless there is direct extra funding from the Executive. I would like Mr Peacock to respond to that point because councils are screaming about their inability to meet local need.

I was recently informed about a long-worked-for community swimming pool in Mintlaw, in Aberdeenshire. The council indicated that it was going to provide deficit funding and has now had to withdraw that. That is in leisure and recreation, an area in which councils have some room for manoeuvre. I ask the Minister for Finance and Local Government to consider how he will deal with that problem. We all know about the riots about roads. I will not go into the farce that is going on in Aberdeen.

Last September, the previous Minister for Finance, Jack McConnell, said twice in his speech that

"devolution gives us the right to decide our own budget". —[Official Report, 20 September 2000; Vol 8, c 459.]

Why is it that the Executive thinks that devolution is only for it? What about local democracy and decision making? I thought that prescriptive activity died with communism.

Angus MacKay: That seems a bizarrely appropriate point at which to intervene. The member has not recognised that the Executive has abolished guidelines for local authorities and that they are now deciding how much they want to spend and how much they raise through council tax. That is central to the debate about local autonomy. In my time as a finance convener I would have welcomed that. That is utterly at odds with what is being suggested about centralising control.

Mr Davidson: Thank you, minister, for clarifying a point I was going to make. What is really being said to councils is, "It is not our fault—go and take it from the council tax payer." Council tax payers are only around 28 per cent of the population, so skewed figures will result from council tax rises. When the Minister for Finance and Local Government was in Aberdeen, I asked him—although he deflected the question—whether there were going to be any sanctions or controls other than the guidance given to local authorities. They would like to hear clearly what is expected of them. The taxpayer in Scotland wants to know that.

We all agree that this year's budget process was a bit of a disaster. The Parliament's committees were unable to address the impact of the budget fully because they did not have the information. I am not blaming the minister for all of that, but we must work much harder to ensure transparency. Mr Wilson commented on the reserve, which did not exist under Mr MacKay's predecessor. At least Mr MacKay is honest enough to say that it exists. It is important that there is clarity and transparency about how money gets into the reserve and where it goes. The same applies to end-year flexibility.

As far as policies are concerned, we believe that the Executive has failed on several counts. I will not go into the Whitehall Treasury model, but I ask the minister not to go down that route. It would be a disaster, because we would be inundated with requests for fiscal autonomy and Scotland would be dragged out of the UK one way or another. That would not be good for Scotland and I ask the minister to resist it.

Brian Adam (North-East Scotland) (SNP): Will the member give way?

Mr Davidson: If it is a brief intervention.

Brian Adam: I love the emotive language, but might David Davidson be willing to concede that Scotland might willingly leave the UK? Would he allow the possibility that Scotland might not have to be dragged?

Mr Davidson: We have returned to a subject that shows the frivolous nature of the SNP's approach to the budget process.

Our spending priorities differ from Labour's. We have mentioned roads infrastructure and roads spending. We would like a restoration of the 1997 capital spending position. Law and order is a great concern, as is the health service. Despite the moneys for the health service that have been talked about this afternoon, we must ask why every trust in Scotland comes to us day after day because they cannot resource the demands on the health service. It is about not what they are currently doing, but the new demands that are coming through. I hope that that will be addressed thoroughly as we go through the budget process. We have not heard much about policies from the minister, so there is not much point in going too far into that. However, I would like to say that the Conservatives believe that, as a matter of urgency, the committees must have the right information in order to be able to consider the budget process accurately, subject by subject. If they do not, the debate becomes farcical. At least today the minister has adopted a fairly gracious approach and not rammed the budget at us. The details are not clear enough for us to make decisions.

The minister's visit to the Finance Committee when it met in Aberdeen was most welcome. Following that, he has set himself a great challenge as to how open he will be. I hope that he will come back to the committee and tell us about his new approach to the budget process.

Angus MacKay: I am grateful to the member for giving way. I would like to apologise to members on the point made by Andrew Wilson earlier about the bill. My understanding is that there was a problem in the post room, which caused the bill to arrive late. Mr Davidson called that to my mind when he raised the issue of information for members. I apologise for the delay in members receiving the bill.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Thank you, minister. Please wind up, Mr Davidson.

Mr Davidson: The minister mentioned progress towards value for money. We have had much talk about reviews and so on. It is vital that the people of Scotland know not what the outputs are, but what the outcomes will be. There is far too much talk about outputs and inputs. People want service on the ground. I ask the minister to clarify that for us in his closing speech.

15:58

Donald Gorrie (Central Scotland) (LD): I feel rather like an actor in a classical Greek tragedy. As a well-educated man, Presiding Officer, you will remember that in all Greek tragedies, the real action takes place off-stage.

Dorothy-Grace Elder (Glasgow) (SNP): And everybody dies.

Donald Gorrie: Quite a few do—but they die at great length.

On behalf of the Liberal Democrats, I welcome the increased funding that is encapsulated in the budget. I am particularly happy about it because, ever since the last general election, my colleagues at Westminster have been pressing Gordon Brown to give out more money instead of sitting on it. We regret the two years during which the Westminster Labour Government stuck to the Tory spending plan. However, we welcome the change in policy and the increased money that is now available. We welcome the priorities of the coalition Administration in areas such as local government—which had a very raw deal in the previous settlement—the elderly, who we have been debating at some length, the McCrone recommendations, health and so on. We welcome what the budget stands for.

We welcome the minister's aim to begin to measure outcomes and outputs, rather than inputs. As a veteran councillor, I remember that, about 20-something years ago, an English professor lectured me on the subject at a Lothian Regional Council performance review committee. I failed to make much progress then, but I am happy to support the minister in trying to make progress now. He is also trying to improve things through the introduction of resource accounting and budgeting which—according to the information that we have been given in the Finance Committee—is a more controversial way of doing things but is, at least, a serious reform of the way in which our financing is done. That is welcome.

In response to David Davidson, I say that I am sure that the Executive, and certainly the Liberal Democrat part of it, is keen to decentralise control to, not suck power away from, local government. We will be working towards giving local government as much scope as possible. Again, agreed outputs will be set for local government which, in its own way, must make an attempt at achieving them. That is the way that things should be done.

We should also encourage the Executive to abandon the practice of almost all Governments and councils of going for project funding for all sorts of activities because it is sexy, photo opportunity-worthy and attractive to the media, rather than giving them core funding, which is far more important.

We must fund existing programmes and work by voluntary organisations, rather than going for nice new projects. Once we have properly funded the core activities, we can move on to nice new projects. However, there is a serious problem with the funding of many of our basic programmes.

A difficulty with the bill and its associated documents becomes apparent when we try to track where expenditure is and what it means. If, like me, members share an enthusiasm for youth work, they will search in vain for any mention of it in the documents. If I have missed it, I will be happy for somebody to correct me. There is information about children, and a bit about sport, but we are not told much and there is nothing about youth work. I am sure that we spend money on youth work, so that should appear in the documents and we should be able to follow it through.

I hope that Angus MacKay's excellent efforts will lead to an improvement in that respect, because in Scotland we lack, to a great extent, information and statistics. That must improve. My colleague at Westminster, Edward Davey, who is expert in such matters, has written a good pamphlet about how Westminster could improve its scrutiny of financial affairs—some of his ideas are applicable here. I look forward to co-operating with the Minister for Finance and Local Government—who has a genuine reforming zeal—to reform the system that we use here, because at the UK level it has been abysmal for years.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We move now to the open debate. We have until 16:39, which at this stage would mean speeches of up to five minutes.

16:03

Mike Watson (Glasgow Cathcart) (Lab): It is nice to follow Donald Gorrie and to hear that the partnership parties, at least sometimes, speak with the same voice. I hope that that will continue for the rest of the afternoon, although I am not holding my breath.

This afternoon's debate has been strange. We heard Andrew Wilson's single transferable speech, which we get on every budget occasion, and which talks about everything other than the budget itself, although it was enjoyable, none the less. We also heard David Davidson's speech. He was quite circumspect—perhaps he is deferring to his colleague Annabel Goldie, who will wind up for the Conservatives—and he said little about the spending commitments.

Mr Davidson rose—

Mike Watson: Perhaps that is because it is becoming more and more obvious as we get closer to the general election that the Tory party is hamstrung by Michael Portillo's comments that they would cut something like £16 billion of public expenditure if—in the horror scenario—they were elected. Scotland's share of that would be almost £2 billion. I cannot offer David Davidson the opportunity to respond at the moment, but it would be helpful if Annabel Goldie turned her attention to that issue when she sums up.

Mr Davidson: Even some BBC people have said that the figure of £16 billion is fiction. How can a figure that does not exist be cut? We would not, and never will, cut public expenditure. We will increase it in real terms.

Mr Kenneth Gibson (Glasgow) (SNP): Never.

Mr Davidson: Never is a long time in politics.

Kenneth Gibson ought to get his facts right and examine the numbers, which our party has never said would be £16 billion of the Labour party's notional spending over the years for which Gordon Brown has planned.

Mike Watson: I hope that the Presiding Officer will be tolerant and allow me to answer that point, although it does not relate directly to today's debate—but why should I break the afternoon's trend? I will quote to David Davidson what his mentor Michael Portillo said about Labour's spending commitments. He said that Labour's

"extra spending, over and above what the economy can afford"—

in his opinion—

"is equivalent to £600 for every taxpayer."

Taken across 28 million taxpayers, that equates to £16 billion that Labour is committed to spending and that a Conservative Government would not spend. I accept that the cut is notional but so, at best, is any Conservative prospect of victory. The matter must be put in the context of the Conservatives' response to the budget. If it came to pass that the Conservatives won the election, we would have about £2 billion less than the encouraging figures in this year's budget.

I suspect that that is why the Opposition has so few options for criticising the Budget (Scotland) (No 2) Bill. Naturally, I welcome that. As Andrew Wilson said, Scotland's budget documents run to 264 pages this year. Last year's equivalent was only 18 pages long. That reflects the fact that we are in the first full year of the process.

Now we have the level III figures, which were not available earlier. Maybe I should adopt the role of the Opposition in commenting on what the minister said. I restate that members and committees need to have the level III figures as early as possible to enable meaningful scrutiny of the proposals at stage 2 of the budget process. We will have the figures this year when the new year's budget comes into being, but we must work—as I am sure that we will—to ensure that the figures are available to us, even in years when a comprehensive spending review or some other review takes place. Whether members received Scotland's budget documents today or—as I did—yesterday, they will not have had enough time to digest all the information. That would be impossible.

I welcomed the minister's comments about some of the changes that he outlined in the letter he wrote to me in my capacity as convener of the Finance Committee. He mentioned a table that shows private finance initiative payments, the real- terms numbers for each department—which the committee asked for—and the fact that the capital charges are shown when they apply for departmental expenditure. I must take issue with the minister on one point. I am sure that he had no involvement in the matter, but he explained in his letter to me that £111 million has been transferred this year from the Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions to the Scottish Executive for grants for providing rail services.

The Finance Committee has consistently raised performance targets. I will provide a little light relief, because Annabel Goldie told me that I was being too serious in a stage 2 debate. I wish that I could be a bit more light-hearted, but there may be something for her and other members in what I will say. The performance target for that expenditure—set out on page 54 of Scotland's budget documents—is:

"To deliver rail services . . . under . . . the ScotRail franchise."

Some people would say that that performance target was pretty ambitious, given recent and current events. I say to the minister that I think that it is pretty vague and not much of a target. It certainly cannot easily be measured, unless a straw poll of commuters is taken at stations such as those that serve the line from Glasgow to Edinburgh—which I use—or the Fife circle. That might provide a hostile response. I raise that point to make it clear that performance targets must be more measurable than that one, which is general.

I have not had the opportunity to read the documents in sufficient detail. We welcome clear performance targets, but if we are to scrutinise meaningfully by moving from outcomes to outputs, as the minister suggested, we must have more specific targets.

16:09

Mr Kenneth Gibson (Glasgow) (SNP): Never is a long time in politics, so I will try not to take an eternity with my speech. I am relieved that Angus MacKay was able to make his statement today. Over the next few days, I hope that he will give me the answers to the questions that I asked previously, but which he could not answer.

On today's consideration of Scotland's budget documents, it is not all peaches and cream, as the minister professed it to be. Like other members, I did not have time to absorb the whole tome, but I noted some interesting parts of it. In summing up, perhaps Mr Peacock can inform us why local authority grants for transport will fall by £7.344 million next year and why housing support grants will fall from £12.414 million to a new low of £9.565 million. He might even explain the decline in moneys that will be allocated to community ownership, which will nosedive from £76.483 million to £47.824 million next year, with further decreases in 2002-04. Andrew Wilson touched on indirect expenditure on schools—I must say that I pointed that out to him over lunch. It is an issue that has been raised in the chamber in recent months by Gil Paterson, Tricia Marwick, Andrew Wilson and others, and it is of great concern to pupils, parents and staff throughout Scotland. We see that there will be a cut from £41.195 million to £34.929 million next year, with further cuts in subsequent years.

Throughout the document there are more cuts, for example, in funding for careers guidance, for further education colleges and for business support. As Gordon Brown continues to display largesse south of the border, Scotland receives a declining share of United Kingdom expenditure. In a normal Parliament, the budget debate would be a wide-ranging assessment of how money is raised, as well as how it is allocated; of what is a fair and efficient way to tax people and what are the optimum choices for expenditure—but not here. This budget takes the funding that is allocated from the Westminster budget and divides it roughly by 11. There is little to which we can take an independent approach. Indeed, as we saw this morning in respect of the Sutherland report, quite the reverse is true. While devolution has created a divergence in policy demand, we have in the Barnett formula a financial system that is designed to produce convergence.

In the main, our criticisms are not levelled at the Government's budget choices, but at the lack of ambition about the tools that are at its disposal. Unfortunately, the Parliament has fewer financial powers than any other legislative Parliament on earth, bar none. I was amazed that David Davidson talked about the constraints on local government, when he knows fine well that we have even less control over the size of our budget than any local authority in Scotland.

Mr Davidson: Is Mr Gibson satisfied with the local government settlement and the way that money is continually ring-fenced? He has obviously had a chance to look at the booklet, so will he tell me whether there is a line in there that tells us how we will get Scottish universities out of deficit?

Mr Gibson: I am sorry that I have not memorised the 260-odd pages of the document in two hours—that is beyond even my incredible powers. Members will be aware that, for example, more than £1 billion in local government finance was raised through the council tax. That is a higher proportion of council expenditure than the Parliament could raise if it used the 3 per cent tax-varying power.

It is not enough for ministers to boast that most budget areas will spend record levels on public services. Every year tends to be a record year for spending. Even under the Tories, more was spent each year than in previous years—it is called inflation. In fact, the only year in recent times in which a record amount was not spent was Labour's first year in power when, for the first time since the national health service was established, expenditure on it was cut.

The outcome is there for all to see, in crumbling transport infrastructure, poor hospital buildings and gross underinvestment in housing. More than £1 billion requires to be spent on school buildings alone. We should not have to watch as spending rises more quickly in the rest of the UK than it does here. We have great potential for wealth in Scotland, which is one of the world's largest oil producers. We are a rich country, but we do not yet have the powers to turn ourselves into a rich society. On any analysis of the coming financial period, Scotland is sending more in taxes to London than it receives. As for oil—that is like winning the lottery and handing the money to the next-door neighbour.

Even on the most conservative of estimates, our surplus will total £7.7 billion this year and next—that is £1,500 for every person in Scotland. Yes, we may have higher expenditure than down south but, despite Scotland's greater need, the margins are closing. Our expenditure is dwarfed by our tax contribution, which amounts to 20 per cent more tax per person from Scotland next year than the average for the rest of the UK.

What is the solution to Scotland's economic and social plight? There is only one—independence.

16:14

Mr Keith Harding (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con): Angus MacKay's contribution said more about the Labour party than it did about finance. For a start, Labour, or the Lib-Lab pact, is not spending more on education, health, housing or law and order—the hard-working taxpayers are picking up the bill. Every time taxpayers visit a petrol station or shop, or have the temerity to turn up to work, they pay more. Their taxes pay for the Executive's policies; it is time that the Executive admitted that.

Under Labour, the tax burden has risen from 35.2 per cent of the national income to 37.3 per cent, as stealth taxation has given the Treasury a surplus of around £11 billion. What has happened to our taxes? Where have they gone? They have been wasted by a party that is obsessed with spin and which is bereft of substance. An example is the escalating cost of the Parliament building. It was originally going to cost £25 million, but will now cost some £200 million. More than £6 million per annum is being spent on spin and glossy brochures. The Scottish Qualifications Authority fiasco was costly.

More is being spent on health, but waiting lists are up and there is a public perception that the health service is deteriorating. Some health boards are struggling to meet substantial budget deficits, with a consequent impact on service delivery. More is being spent on education, but so much of that money is ring-fenced that, to meet the Executive's priorities, councils have to increase council tax well above the rate of inflation and cut services at the same time. The services that are cut are those that really matter to the public, such as litter collection, road and pavement repairs, leisure and recreation, libraries and many others. Without question, under Labour, people pay more and get less.

Labour politicians have thrown cash at the new deal, but most of the people whom they claim to have helped would have been helped anyway. After nearly four years in office, Labour's report card is appalling. Police numbers are down and crime is up. Standards in education are down and waiting lists are up. Roads are crumbling and bridges are falling.

Some businesses trusted Labour four years ago when it said that there would be no increase in taxation, yet Scots businesses now suffer from an Executive that is determined to squeeze every penny from their hard-working enterprise. That is why business rates have gone up and that is why the Conservatives will bring them down, because we believe in business and in Scotland. That is why we believe in a low-tax economy that puts the needs of the individual before the needs of Government. We believe in an economy that helps businesses—

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Mr Harding, I have been remarkably relaxed during the debate, but let us not have too much of a PPB, please.

Mr Harding: Not too much of a what?

The Deputy Presiding Officer: A party political broadcast.

Mr Harding: With respect, Presiding Officer, I thought that we were politicians.

The Conservatives believe in helping people to help themselves. That is why we mean it when we say that we will abolish tuition fees and be tough on crime. We want people to help themselves, but we also want to help those who cannot do that. That is why we will implement the Sutherland recommendation for free personal care for the elderly and protect those who were prudent enough to save for a better life. It is time that the Executive delivered instead of congratulating itself at every opportunity.

16:18

George Lyon (Argyll and Bute) (LD): I welcome the opportunity to support the Executive in this afternoon's debate. It is rather ironic that there will not be a vote on this motion.

Let us look at the highlights of the Scottish budget. We see a record level of £5 billion over three years for education spending. For health, record levels of spending are confirmed, with an extra £400 million a year. For transport, there is also a record level of spending, with £170 million more cash by year 3 and a rise of 45 per cent. There are also record levels of spending for local services, with a £1.2 billion increase for local government by year 3 and a 57 per cent increase in allocation for the capital programmes.

That has to be good news, and it contrasts quite distinctly with the years of cuts by the Conservatives, continued, unfortunately, during the first two years of the UK Labour Administration.

Miss Annabel Goldie (West of Scotland) (Con): I thought that, as a member of one of the coalition parties, Mr Lyon would know that the experts on cuts are in the Executive. As I understand it, my party, which he accuses of cutting, increased police numbers in Scotland, and the coalition Executive has managed to reduce police numbers in Scotland.

George Lyon: In addition to the Scottish Executive police grant of £57 million in 2001-02, there will be a further £70 million in 2002-03 and an extra £70 million in 2003-04. That turnaround is substantial.

Andrew Wilson: Will the member give way?

George Lyon: I do not have a lot of time.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: You have five minutes, Mr Lyon.

George Lyon: Okay.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Carry on, Duncan Hamilton. No, sorry—Andrew Wilson.

Andrew Wilson: I did not realise that I had deteriorated to that extent over the recent months.

The germane point remains that, under the Lib-Lab coalition, there are fewer police on the streets of Scotland today than when the Conservatives left office. That is the reality that the electorate faces at the general election. Why is it that the Liberal Democrats will have to defend that?

George Lyon: The future increase in funding will, of course, allow a substantial rise in police numbers to record levels, as Andrew Wilson well knows.

The local government settlement was the Scottish Liberal Democrats' No 1 priority. We have seen removal of the budgetary guidelines and, with three-year budgets in place, we now have stability.

There are record increases in the settlement for local government over the next three years. That will allow local authorities time to plan. A three-year budget is now in place. Indeed, my constituency, Argyll and Bute, is seeing a 15.9 per cent increase in its budget over the next three years. That is compared with 5 per cent in the previous three years. That will not solve all the problems or change the world overnight, but it is a step change in the level of funding for local government.

I welcome also the increases for education. At a recent meeting with the local school board, many teachers were represented. They too gave a warm welcome to the McCrone deal and were enthusiastic that it would transform the teaching profession if it is implemented. Extra resources are also needed to tackle the huge problems with our school buildings. I do not minimise the challenge—investment of £1 billion is needed to get our school buildings up to scratch—but at least we have turned the corner. We will see an increase in spending over the next year or two.

Mr Gibson: Is Scotland's share of UK expenditure increasing or decreasing?

George Lyon: As the member well knows, we started off with a record spending level, which is 20 per cent higher than in England and Wales.

Mr Gibson: Not any more.

George Lyon: Per capita spending is 20 per cent higher than in England and Wales. I am happy with that level of spending.

I want to make progress. The extra funding for health is already beginning to make its mark at constituency level. Mid-Argyll hospital in my constituency has been promised the funding for 10 years. The likelihood is that it will now be delivered within the next two years. On care for the elderly, there is the package that has been announced, as well as the extra bit that I hope will come if the right vote is cast tonight.

I want to highlight another issue: the money spent on abolishing tuition fees, which was a long-held objective of the Scottish Liberal Democrat party. Tuition fees are now fully funded for this year and for the future.

I want to wind up by saying that this is a new beginning in public sector investment. It is a break with the Tories' agenda of cut after cut. For the next three years, we will see that investment begin to make a real difference for the people of Scotland.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I call Duncan Hamilton.

16:23

Mr Duncan Hamilton (Highlands and Islands) (SNP): I thank you, Presiding Officer, if you are sure that it is me you mean to call. I must register in the strongest possible terms a complaint about the fact that Andrew Wilson was addressed as Duncan Hamilton. As you know, he has been on a cabbage soup diet, but I do not think that he has quite reached the stage of being in that ball park.

It is worth returning to the point made by Donald Gorrie at the beginning of the debate about the presentation of the document. Like everyone else, I must concede that I have not read the document, because I did not have it. Donald Gorrie's point, however, is worth emphasising. He took the example of youth work. The way in which the figures are presented means that, if we wanted to pull out the figures on the Executive's policy initiatives in that field, we could not do so. By contrast, if I were to open the document randomly at page 220, I would be informed that the National Archives of Scotland has a performance target to issue replies to 60 per cent of correspondence within 15 days and to 90 per cent of correspondence within 25 days. I can honestly say, hand on heart, that not a single constituent in any of the constituencies that I represent has ever even raised that issue. We maybe want to think again about the information that we put in this document. We want accountability and transparency, but we must get the balance right.

I will also pick up on a comment that Lord Watson made. His lordship said that the departmental aims needed to be revisited. The point is made on page 220 that the aim is to enable the National Archives for Scotland to deliver its business as effectively and efficiently as possible. I do not think that anyone in Scotland would have the audacity to challenge that visionary goal. Let us suggest that the presentation should be considered again.

The minister did not say a great deal in his statement, which is why this debate has become slightly redundant. However, he took the opportunity to remind us that we have record investment. As Kenny Gibson said, that is hardly a surprise as every year produces record investment, with the one noticeable exception of the first year under Labour. The Executive would not wish to dwell on that. The minister also failed to mention that, as a percentage of national wealth, public spending on public services is going down and is below the level that it was under the Tories. That suggests that, as some Conservative members have pointed out, this is not the time for self-congratulation.

We are told—this is germane to the debate that we have been having today—that it is a top priority to put more money into the health budget and that a long-term priority is that the cost of personal care for the elderly will be met. If that is being treated as a top priority, I would hate to be reliant on one of the Executive's lower priorities. It does not suggest that it would be taken very seriously.

The exchange between Andrew Wilson and various Labour members was instructive, because it was pointed out that a fifth of the underspend in health and a seventeenth of the total underspend would cover the cost. We can go into the argument about flows, stocks and reserves as a separate issue. What we can say, at the very least, is that it is entirely indicative of the level of investment that would be needed. I have not heard a single member from the Executive parties contend that if the Parliament decides that it wants to do that as a priority we could not afford to do so, although Dr Simpson looks poised to break that duck.

Dr Simpson: Andrew Wilson made a point about using reserves for other purposes. Duncan Hamilton is now making a point about using the NHS underspend at the end of each year. There has been an underspend every year since 1948; it is in the nature of the way in which the money is spent. However, it is not totally predictable. To predicate care of the elderly on the basis of expenditure which we cannot be certain of in future years seems to be the height of foolishness. Is that now SNP policy?

Mr Hamilton: No. It will not surprise Dr Simpson to know that I would not accept that what we are describing is the height of foolishness.

The point of the exchange at the Finance Committee—which Dr Simpson attended and I did not, but at least I had the benefit of being able to read it—is that when there was a question about the reserves it was described as a flow. Therefore, the argument that it can be relied upon is much more sustainable according to the expert evidence that the Finance Committee took than anything that we have heard from Labour members.

It is also interesting to note that the figure of £25 million has been disputed only by Labour. No mention has been made of the fact that when that figure was presented to the Sutherland commission, it had a debate on that figure and Lord Lipsey's attempt to mislead people on the figures was rejected.

I was trying to go through today without disagreeing with George Lyon. I was doing terribly well this morning, but I must pick up on one or two points that he made in his speech. He gave some indicative examples on council spending that are worth picking up. He mentioned Argyll and Bute Council, which is of course in—shall I say?—our constituency. He did not mention that the increase is below average. He did not mention the fact that there is still a major strain on resources in that council. It ill behoves a local member for that constituency to talk down the prospects of further finance. Surely it is the job of a local member to talk up those prospects.

George Lyon also referred to the fact that he was comfortable that on a per capita basis Scotland gets 20 per cent more on health. The point is, where is the momentum? Is it increasing or decreasing? If George Lyon thinks that 20 per cent is justifiable now, why is it not justifiable in the next five or 10 years? Why is a member arguing for a reduction in the Scottish block? I find that incomprehensible—talking of which, I will take Iain Smith's point.

Iain Smith (North-East Fife) (LD): On the issue of the NHS, Andrew Wilson, of all people, asked a written question that was answered on 30 November. He asked

"what the difference was in per capita health spending between Scotland and England in 1997-98"

and the projections for such spending in 2003-04. Susan Deacon replied that

"health expenditure per head in 1997-98 was £147 more than in England. Planned expenditure for 2003-04 is £194 more than in England."—[Official Report, Written Answers, 30 November 2000; Vol 9, p 160.]

How is that reducing the gap?

Mr Hamilton: That is interesting. On that basis, the Liberal Democrats are presumably declining the concept of the Barnett squeeze—I am not entirely sure that they want to put that on the record. It is the role of parties in this Parliament—[Interruption.] Well, now we have a whole host of parties declining the prospect of the Barnett squeeze. It is an economic fact. The role of the Parliament is to try to increase the total budget for Scotland and its services, not to give it away at the first opportunity.

Before I conclude, I suggest that this debate has probably missed the mark. We in Scotland need to think a bit beyond our current confines. There is something nonsensical about our Parliament and its budgets. For example, why should the Parliament be charged with economic development when it has no role in the wider economy? We have to wonder why, if the Parliament is going to argue over the division of the cake, it cannot play its full part in increasing the size of that cake through having its own economic direction based on Scottish needs. That central tenet of this debate has never been answered; this debate has been about good housekeeping, not about vision or the best way forward for Scotland. We should take that route if we want to make real progress.

16:31

Elaine Thomson (Aberdeen North) (Lab): I am pleased to be able to take part in this afternoon's debate, which I consider to be one of Parliament's more important debates, as it concerns the expenditure of the best part of £20 billion. That is a lot of money in anyone's book. We are now in the third and final part of the budget process as developed by FIAG. Although this is the second budget bill to be considered, it is the first time that the full budget process has been used. Later, we will reflect on any improvements that can be made to the process.

I am glad to hear that the Opposition parties are not obstructing the bill's progress—the chamber will be pleased to hear that the Labour back benchers are not obstructing it either—particularly as the spending review 2000 has meant that this year there have been unprecedented increases in public expenditure. As George Lyon said earlier, health spending has increased by 15 per cent to £5.5 billion, with transport spending up by 45 per cent.

This year's spending review, which covers the financial period up to 2003, represents the biggest sustained investment in Scotland's public services. Investment from the spending review 2000 and its predecessor, the comprehensive spending review, coupled with the financial stability that three-year budgeting is bringing public services, will make an enormous difference to the levels of service provision. By the end of the first term of the Parliament, there will be an extra £2 billion of spending in Scotland, which represents an extra £600 for every man, woman and child.

In education alone, spending by 2003-04 will be more than £5 billion. That will be crucial to the future of Scotland, as it will mean that it will continue to have a sound economy and be able to compete and win within the developing global economy where knowledge and skills are what matter.

However, I want to make it clear that this expansionary budget results from sound management of the Scottish and UK economies. Members should not take my word for that. The Royal Bank of Scotland has said:

"The UK economy has continued to perform well. There have been 33 quarters of positive growth."

Furthermore, the bank looks forward to

"buoyant economic activity and low inflation over the next two years".

Unemployment is at its lowest level for decades—indeed, there are increasing concerns about labour and skill shortages—which is a positive reflection of the sound economic management by Labour in the UK Government and Scottish Executive. That sound management is funding the current investment in public spending. After years of Tory mismanagement, sound Labour policies are delivering—

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The member will remember my remarks about PPBs.

Elaine Thomson: I do.

Sound Labour policies are now delivering for the people of Scotland through today's budget bill. It is important that the Scottish Parliament develops effective scrutiny of the budget and that we ensure that the best use is being made of public money in the delivery of public services. It is also important that the whole process, which was set up to be open, accessible and accountable both to the Parliament and to the people of Scotland, continues to be so and is developed.

As part of the process, the Minister for Finance and Local Government has held public meetings around Scotland, the Finance Committee has met in Aberdeen and the parliamentary committees have been able to input into the budget and discuss the spending priorities in the budget with the relevant minister. I am sure that the process will develop in future years. I was disappointed with some of Duncan Hamilton's remarks. As he is not a member of the Finance Committee, perhaps he is not sure about some of the work that we have been doing in examining the presentation of the budget and the way in which that can be improved.

I was pleased that the minister mentioned the modernising government initiative. Modernising government is extremely important. I am pleased that Aberdeen City Council recently received the highest award from the modernising government fund—some £2 million—which, at the level of local government, will transform the interface between the council and the citizens. I would like that interface at the level of central Government as well, which is part of what the Finance Committee has been discussing in the context of improving the presentation of the budgetary documentation.

Aberdeen City Council is talking about all sorts of exciting things such as electronic accord cards, for use on public transport or for school kids to get their meals, and electronic fault reporting. Some of the schemes are so innovative that other councils want to contract Aberdeen City Council to set them up. The modernising government fund, which is financed by the budget, should be pushed forward. We have a sound budget, and I look forward to its continuation.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: If Mr Adam, the SNP's tail-end Charlie, wants a couple of minutes, he can have them.

16:37

Brian Adam (North-East Scotland) (SNP): Thank you for that kind remark, Presiding Officer. It is not every day that I am called a tail-end Charlie.

There have been one or two interesting misuses of language this afternoon, which we should not be surprised at from the Executive parties. I am not sure what a step change is. George Lyon used that term. I had an idea that a step change was a quantum leap rather than a sort of shuffle forward. A shuffle forward is certainly better than we have had before, but I hardly think that what has been presented to us today qualifies as a step change—whatever that is.

George Lyon mentioned some changes that have taken place, in regard to the financing of students. He assured us that tuition fees had been abolished. Fees is an interesting word: they could be regarded as a tax or a charge. But how will fees be replaced? They will be replaced by an endowment—a gift. What kind of gift will we get? The opportunity to pay another charge, fee or tax. The only reason why we are not allowed to call it a tax is that the Scotland Act 1998 does not allow the Parliament to levy any new taxes. However, an endowment—in new Labour or new coalition speak—is okay.

George Lyon: Mr Adam will understand that the endowment is to the next lot of students, who will receive the benefit of it.

Brian Adam: That is an extremely interesting concept. The endowment is almost hypothecated taxes—a case of, "I'll take the money from you and give it to him."

The bill lays out the situation a little more clearly, and I concede that there have been advances in the way in which it is laid out. I would like a description of the change—not just in the Government's programme, as laid out in its manifesto, but in a percentage figure. That would enhance the quality of the material in the bill. I would also like to see an explanation as to how the money is to be expended, on the basis not just of the total amount expended but perhaps of whether expenditure is made on a needs basis and how those needs are assessed.

There are some significant assessment differences and the Government tends to use a wide variety of assessment methods, some of which are not transparent. In the area that I represent, there are some considerable concerns that needs assessments often seem to benefit a particular part of the country and that, when a proper needs assessment might be made, it never benefits the north-east.

16:40

Iain Smith (North-East Fife) (LD): This is rather a strange debate to sum up because there does not seem to be much to sum up. I took part in council budget debates for 17 years. At that time, the parties came to a budget debate with different proposals. The administration would produce its plans and the opposition parties would say what they wanted to change.

In today's debate, however, we have heard little about what the Opposition parties would change in the budget. We have heard an awful lot about the ways in which they think that the process is all wrong and about the fact that the Parliament should have more powers. Although the SNP constantly calls for the Parliament to have more powers, it will not even tell us what it would do with the powers that we already have.

Andrew Wilson: Will the member give way?

Iain Smith: In a moment.

Would the SNP use the tax-varying power? It has not said whether it would. If it would not, how would it fund the additional spending commitments that it keeps coming up with and how would it address the alleged cuts that appear in the budget document?

Mr Gibson: Alleged cuts? The member should read the document.

Iain Smith: If the SNP is to address the cuts that it claims there are, it will have to remove something from the budget to do so, unless it uses the tax-varying power. Not once has the SNP told us what it would cut in order to fund the changes that it wants.

Andrew Wilson: How do the Liberal Democrats propose that we pay for Sutherland if not by cuts?

Iain Smith: We want there to be a commitment to the principle of Sutherland, but we do not expect the recommendations to be implemented overnight. They will be implemented as and when the resources are identified.

The budget includes a number of the priorities that we were elected to the Scottish Parliament to deliver. We wanted there to be more money for schools, health, the police and local government. All of that has been achieved in the budget, and that is important for Liberal Democrats. Also of great importance to us is the fact that the budget provides the money for the abolition of tuition fees. I am sorry, but what Brian Adam said was absolute nonsense: the endowment is to fund grant support for students from low-income backgrounds. If the SNP does not want that grant support to go to those students, its members should feel free to vote against the endowment. The endowment is not to fund tuition fees; tuition fees are being funded already.

David Davidson wanted to know where the line was on support for our hard-pressed universities. On page 143 of the document, he will see that there is a real-terms increase in direct support for current funding for higher education institutions of £35 million.

Mr Davidson: Will the member give way?

Iain Smith: I have only a minute left and have much to say.

As I said, for 17 years in Fife, I took part in budget debates. Each year, I talked about the dreadful situation that we were in because of the cuts that were being imposed on local government by the Conservative Government. [Interruption.] I spoke about cuts that were imposed by Conservative Governments, never by a Liberal Democrat administration. There were guidelines, caps, clawbacks and, in the last three years alone of Conservative rule, the Government managed to claw back a cut of £500 million from local authorities in Scotland. Yet the Conservatives have the nerve to say today that the Executive—with record increases in its spending for local government—is putting the squeeze on local government. That is nonsense.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I must ask Mr Smith to wind up.

Iain Smith: This Government is addressing the years of underfunding of local government, and I am proud to be a part of the partnership Government that is delivering that.

16:44

Miss Annabel Goldie (West of Scotland) (Con): The budget document hardly leaves one flushed with excitement. Mr Smith's speech was the most stimulating to my fluttering heart that I have heard all afternoon—I have never listened to such unadulterated hogwash in my life. If Mr Smith has the brass neck to accuse the Conservatives of cuts, he should explain to the coalition partners and the rest of the Scottish Parliament why less is being spent on education now than was being spent under the Conservatives three years ago.

Budgets boil down to three components: what have we got, what do we decide to spend it on and do we get value for the spend? Straddling those three premises is the budget process.

One of the virtues of the Parliament is its committee structure. Today, I will quote not Greek tragedy, Mr Gorrie, but the words of Robert Burns:

"Humid seal of soft affection,
Tenderest pledge of future bliss,
Dearest tie of young connexion
Love's first snow-drop, virgin kiss!"

The minister should not take this personally, but the virgin kiss that the committees are seeking from him is disaggregation—that would indeed be virgin. Will the Deputy Minister for Finance and Local Government confirm whether more detailed figures are to be disclosed before stage 2? Without that information, the budget process is defective.

To turn to the question of what to spend the money on, there are concerns. Quite simply, they are that waiting times for the ill are up; the number of police officers is down since 1997; the level of crime is up; prisons have been closed; students are worse off; and there is no provision for the modest spend that is necessary to implement Sutherland's recommendation for universal personal care. There has to be a strong suspicion that those concerns are not being robustly addressed in the budget.

On value for money, £18 billion is a very great deal, particularly when it is produced by the public and the taxpayer. David Davidson was absolutely right: the Executive can jaw away about inputs and outputs, but it is outcome, performance and efficiency that have to be the determinants of value for money. While Mr Davidson has affirmed the position of the Conservative group—that we shall not vote against the budget—that should not be construed as complacency at or pleasure in what it has to offer.

16:47

Mr Adam Ingram (South of Scotland) (SNP): We on the SNP benches offer no opposition to the general principles of the Budget (Scotland) (No 2) Bill. However, we would wish the Executive to lodge amendments at stage 3 to take account of the Parliament's will to fund free personal care for the elderly, as demonstrated in the debate this morning and, we hope, in the forthcoming vote.

As Angus MacKay indicated, this is the first budget bill to have emerged from the budget process as envisaged by FIAG. As the pre-Christmas debate on the Finance Committee's report on the draft bill revealed, there is still a considerable way to go before the process can be described as entirely satisfactory in terms of allowing full scrutiny by and input from the parliamentary committees. I welcome the Executive's commitment to work with the Finance Committee to make the necessary improvements to that process, and I am sure that the committee members who spoke in the debate, including David Davidson and Donald Gorrie—not to mention Mike Watson and Elaine Thomson—will hold the Executive to that.

The total budget available to the Parliament to secure the objectives of prosperity and social justice is £18.4 billion. That is less than half the £41.5 billion of tax revenues that were extracted from Scotland by Her Majesty's Treasury in London.

The SNP will continue to champion the case—as Kenny Gibson and Duncan Hamilton did so eloquently this afternoon—that Scotland would be significantly better served if this Parliament assumed the responsibility not only for the distribution of all tax revenues raised in Scotland but for fiscal policy in its entirety. That would allow for a programme not just for the modernisation of government, but for the establishment of a real Government for Scotland. It would allow for much more meaningful budget debates than the one we have—unfortunately—had this afternoon.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I call Peter Peacock to respond to the debate on behalf of the Scottish Executive. The minister has until 5 o'clock if he so wishes.

Alex Neil (Central Scotland) (SNP): On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Apparently, the press have been informed that there is to be an Executive statement after 5 o'clock, on the long-term care of the elderly. Why do the press know that there is to be such a statement, but members have not been informed? Is it in order for me to move that the Executive statement be made before rather than after decision time?

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I have no knowledge whatever of the point that the member raises, as I have been in the chair since half-past 3. I will have inquiries made, but at this point the appropriate course of action is to ask the minister to continue with his winding-up speech.

16:50

The Deputy Minister for Finance and Local Government (Peter Peacock): Some important points have been made in this short debate, as well as the usual passages of fantasy from the SNP and disguise from our Conservative friends.

The Budget (Scotland) (No 2) Bill highlights the achievements of the Scottish Government over the past year. It reflects record levels of public expenditure, which have been made possible by the sound stewardship of a Labour Government with a Scottish chancellor in Westminster. They are delivered through the continuing success of the Barnett formula in securing a fair share of the UK's wealth for Scotland, without recourse to an annual round of detailed and damaging negotiations, which is what the SNP seeks by attacking the Barnett formula.

The spending review has provided an increase to the Scottish budget of expenditure of £800 million in 2001-02. The details of the bill provide for that money to be spent on the programmes of the Scottish Executive. There will be increases of £1.9 billion in 2002-03, and £3 billion in 2003-04.

Andrew Wilson: Does the minister accept that even after those record increases in spending, at the end of the Labour Administration, just as at the beginning, the Executive will devote less of the nation's wealth to valued public services than when the Conservatives left office?

Peter Peacock: One cannot spend percentages or proportions, but one can spend real money. Substantial additional real money will come to Scotland. There will be increases of £800 million in 2001-02, £1.9 billion in 2002-03, and £3 billion in the year after that. Those are record levels of resources for key Government programmes.

I will respond to as many of the points that have been raised in the debate as possible. First, I apologise that the detailed budget documents were not available to Andrew Wilson. I recommend that he go on one of the rapid reading courses that the Administration arranges, which would improve his ability to read those documents. I understand that if one goes on two rapid reading courses, one can read four times as quickly, so I recommend that as a future tactic.

Andrew Wilson reverted to his usual whingeing and moaning, girning and greeting, about the Scottish position. He focused entirely on what we cannot do in Scotland rather than on what we can do: we can do an immense amount with the current budget.

Several members, such as David Davidson and Mike Watson, talked about the importance of including level III figures in the budget document. We accept that point, and want to include such figures. There is no difficulty about doing so in a normal year, but it is difficult to do so in a comprehensive spending review year, such as the past year has been. We cannot promise that level III figures can be provided in the required time scale on every occasion, as we are not in control of the time scale according to which spending reviews are conducted south of the border. [Interruption.]

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Order. There are far too many private conversations going on in the chamber. If members wish to conduct private conversations, they should do so outside the chamber.

Peter Peacock: David Davidson complained that there was no detail, but he had obviously not seen the budget document when he said that. Mike Watson properly pointed out that the document is several times larger than previous documents. That fact reveals that much more information is being given. Several members, including Mike Watson and Duncan Hamilton, referred to performance targets and asked whether we were meeting our outcomes and targets. We are very serious about pursuing that issue with the Finance Committee. As Annabel Goldie made clear, we need to examine the outcomes of our expenditure as well as the outputs. We want to work with the committee to ensure that we are more focused on outcomes than on inputs.

Mr Davidson: I was not complaining about what was in the document to which the minister referred. I was complaining that the document did not contain the detail that the committees need, so that they can see how policies translate into action on the ground.

Peter Peacock: As we have said, Angus MacKay and I are more than happy to examine the matter in considerable detail. We want to move the debate on.

One does not advertise Mars bars on the basis of how many people are employed to make them—one advertises them on the basis of how good they are and what their consumption will mean to people. We must move to that approach in relation to public services—we must examine the outputs and outcomes of our spending, not just the inputs.

Andrew Wilson: The deputy minister said that we should focus on outcomes rather than on inputs when it comes to the budget. Are the deputy minister and the Government satisfied that, after the Labour Administration has been in power for three years, homelessness is at a record level, NHS waiting lists are higher than they were when Labour came to power and there are fewer police officers on the streets than there were when Labour came to power? George Lyon made a point about the extra spending, but even after extra spending on the police, at the end of the next Labour Administration there will be less than half a police officer more than when the Conservatives left office.

Peter Peacock: As George Lyon indicated, the purpose of the bill is to release much more resource into the system this year, even more resource the year after that and yet more the year after that, to address and tackle the points that Andrew Wilson raised.

We are not seeking to hide from the reality of performance measures and performance targets. We want them to be put into the system for the purposes of discipline, to ensure that we are getting best value for expenditure.

Other members referred to the creation of a reserve in the budget. A small reserve is being created—not by deliberate underspending but through a line that has been inserted this year. We have not decided that the reserve will continue in future years. Richard Simpson and other members made a number of points on the difficulty of attaching long-term spending to a short-term budget decision, as that would be quite inappropriate and would lead to trouble.

Andrew Wilson: At this late hour, we finally have clarity on the reserve. Mr MacKay said that the reserve was a one-off and would not recur. However, the deputy minister has just said that an allocation to the reserve will be made in each of the next four years. That point is also made in the budget document. Can that reserve be accessed or not? [Interruption.]

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Patricia Ferguson): Before the deputy minister resumes his speech, I ask members to keep down the level of background conversation.

Peter Peacock: I indicated that there is a line for the reserve in this year's budget. However, no definite decision has been reached about the years to come. That is why we cannot build basic expenditure around the reserve. Andrew Wilson's point reveals just how inadequate is the SNP's financial management. The SNP cannot even manage its own budget—its new London leader has taken it to the brink of bankruptcy. It is having to flog off its office and move to the margins of Edinburgh, and having to borrow money to pay off its debts, rather than borrowing to invest. It is no wonder that no one trusts the SNP with government in any part of Scotland.

The creation of a treasury was referred to. I detected a small frisson of excitement about that, but no one should get too excited. The finance function of the Executive will develop over time—it is developing already. Angus MacKay referred to the best-value function, to a strengthening of the budget process over time and to the Executive performing a more corporate role in relation to setting and monitoring standards and outcomes for expenditure. All those factors will be added into the equation of how the finance function develops. However, it will not become a treasury function in the way that some members attempted to indicate.

This is a record budget which delivers record levels of services, not vague promises on the never-never. It delivers extra spending of £800 million next year, £1.9 billion in 2002-03 and £3 billion in 2003-04. On top of that extra spending, we have demonstrated our commitment to getting more out of existing funding.

I commend those achievements and the bill that will deliver on them to the Parliament.

Points of Order

16:58

Alex Neil (Central Scotland) (SNP): On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Twenty minutes ago, I raised a point of order about a statement by the Executive.

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Patricia Ferguson): I am in a position to answer that point of order, Mr Neil.

Alex Neil: The Minister for Parliament is in the chamber. Can he tell us why the press knew about half an hour ago that there was to be an Executive statement, while members did not? Is it intended that that statement should be made before or after the votes at 5 o'clock?

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I have received a request for an urgent ministerial statement to be made. I intend to allow that statement to be made before decision time. As is required by standing orders, I will then allow a few brief questions to be asked of the minister. We will then proceed to decision time.

Ms Margo MacDonald (Lothians) (SNP): On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Tricia Marwick (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP): On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I will hear Ms Marwick's point of order.

Tricia Marwick: The Executive has had three opportunities in the past two days to make its position absolutely clear. There was yesterday's statement, then a debate today, then First Minister's question time—[Interruption.]

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Order. I cannot hear the member.

Tricia Marwick: If the Executive statement has any material bearing on today's debate, I ask the Presiding Officers to reconsider their decision. Unfortunately, we are not party to what the statement contains, but if it affects the debate materially, I argue that the Executive has had plenty opportunity to make its position clear to the chamber.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: As I have already said, I intend to take the ministerial statement before decision time. I am now going to call Mr Tom McCabe—

Ms Margo MacDonald (Lothians) (SNP): On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I hope that it is not the same point of order.

Ms MacDonald: Can you rule as to whether, on a future occasion, if any party wishes to make a statement following a debate, you will allow that statement to be made and that that gesture will not be made simply towards the Executive?

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I cannot, and nor can my colleagues, predict what issues may arise in the future. However, I will say to Ms MacDonald that there is provision in the standing orders for ministerial statements of an urgent or emergency nature to be made.

Alex Neil: On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Mr Lloyd Quinan (West of Scotland) (SNP): On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We have deemed that the statement this afternoon is of such a nature.

Members cannot make a point of order while I am still speaking. That is a matter of common courtesy and, apart from that, what I am saying may pertain to the point that the members are trying to make.

I was saying to Ms MacDonald that there is provision in the standing orders for this statement to be taken this afternoon. It is our intention to take it.

Alex Neil: My point of order relates to how the press knew about this half an hour ago and yet Parliament has only just been told. Were the press informed by the Executive or by the office of the Presiding Officer? Is it not out of order that members are not told before the press that there is to be a statement?

The Deputy Presiding Officer: All I can tell you, Mr Neil, is that the decision to hear the statement was agreed by the Presiding Officers after your point of order earlier this afternoon. We do not know that the press knew of it earlier than that. We have no way of knowing whether the press knew of it earlier. If we find that the press did know earlier, that would obviously be dealt with accordingly. However, that is not our information at this stage.

Lord James Douglas-Hamilton (Lothians) (Con): On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I understand that, under rule 13.2.2 of the standing orders, the statement will be debated. Can you confirm how many members will be called from each party?

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Given that we are now past the scheduled time for decision time and that we need to conclude decision time shortly, I intend to take one member from each of the major parties. I now call Mr McCabe—

Tricia Marwick rose—

Tommy Sheridan (Glasgow) (SSP): On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I hope that you will accept that the ruling that you have just given—that only members of the major parties may speak—could set a very unhappy precedent. The definition of major parties may change, as you well know. May I invite you instead to say that you will give an opportunity to all the parties in this Parliament? That would be much more courteous. Quite rightly, you made a point about members showing courtesy while others are speaking.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I am not setting a precedent, Mr Sheridan, because we review each case on its merits. This afternoon, I will take one member from each of the major parties.

Tricia Marwick: On a point of order.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I hope that this is a different point.

Tricia Marwick: It is a different point. You have indicated that the Presiding Officers have agreed that the statement is of an urgent or emergency nature and that, under standing orders, you will take it. Do I therefore take it that you have knowledge of the statement? Can I ask the Presiding Officers whether the statement relates to the debate that we have had today? What is it about this emergency statement that makes it so urgent that you have had to take it?

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We could hardly judge it to be of an urgent nature if we did not know the topic to be covered. We do know the topic to be covered; we do not know the content. We are, however, advised that it is germane to today's proceedings. We have therefore decided to take it. I intend to call Mr McCabe now—

Tricia Marwick rose—

Mr John Swinney (North Tayside) (SNP): On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The Opposition parties depend on the protection of the chair in the issues they bring forward in the Parliament. We provided an opportunity for personal care of the elderly to be debated in Parliament this morning. You said that you do not know the content of the statement. With respect, I question how the Presiding Officers can judge the statement that Mr McCabe proposes to make to be of an urgent nature if you do not know its content.

Members: That is not a point of order.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I remind you of the rules governing questions to the chair about rulings. However, as a matter of courtesy I will say that the subject under discussion has been of great interest to members of the Parliament and to the public. In such circumstances it is appropriate to take the statement at this time. I intend to move to take the statement.

Dennis Canavan (Falkirk West): On a point of order. The Parliament has agreed that decision time should be at 5 pm. It is now after that time, so I move that the questions be now put.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I have the power to change that and I propose to do so.

Tricia Marwick: On a point of order, Presiding Officer. We are in your hands on this matter. Will you confirm that the content of the emergency statement could not have been given during the debate today?

The Deputy Presiding Officer: If we move to the statement we will find that out—[Interruption.] Let me finish. Suffice it to say that the information we have leads us to that conclusion. [Interruption.]

Tricia Marwick: Will you repeat that?

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I said that the information we have leads us to that conclusion.

Personal Care for the Elderly

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Patricia Ferguson): I call Mr Tom McCabe to make a brief statement.

17:07

The Minister for Parliament (Mr Tom McCabe): Thank you. It is right to say that other parties were not given notice of this statement, but the change of subject for debate here today was not notified to the Executive or to other parties.

The entire Scottish Executive listened very carefully to the debate in the Parliament arranged at short notice today and to the debate outwith the Parliament about the care of the elderly over recent months. We have taken cognisance of the views expressed yesterday and today, especially the sincerely held views of our colleagues in the Liberal Democrat and Labour parties. Today's very helpful amendment commits us only to move forward, but I want to put on record on behalf of the Executive where the process will lead us. I can therefore assure the Parliament that the Executive will bring forward, as soon as practicable after consideration of the development group's report in August 2001, proposals for the implementation of free personal care for all—[Applause.]

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Order.

Mr McCabe: That will be accompanied by—[Interruption.]

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Order.

Mr McCabe: It will be accompanied by an analysis of the costs and implications of so doing. [Applause.]

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Order. [Interruption.] Mr Cleland, I will have to suspend the meeting if you do not leave the gallery.

17:09

Meeting suspended.

17:10

On resuming—

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I call Nicola Sturgeon to speak on behalf of the Scottish National Party.

Nicola Sturgeon (Glasgow) (SNP): It is absolutely disgraceful, given that the Government—[Interruption.] Never has a word seemed more inappropriate—[Interruption.]

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Order.

Nicola Sturgeon: The Government has had three opportunities in the past two days, but it has taken—[Interruption.] I think that you should call some order, Presiding Officer.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The chamber will come to order and members will refrain from trying to give me instructions. Ms Sturgeon, you may continue. I expect silence from the other members.

Nicola Sturgeon: The Government—a word so inappropriate—has had three opportunities in two days to clarify its position and it is disgraceful that it has taken until two minutes before a vote in which it was staring defeat in the face to clarify its decision. The Government is driven less by care for the elderly and more by consideration of its own political survival.

Let me make it clear that I welcome the movement by the Government this afternoon. However, let me make it equally clear that it is nothing short of tragic that the Government has had to be dragged kicking and screaming to give justice for Scotland's elderly people. This afternoon is a victory for the elderly people of our country. The Government does not know its own mind from one hour to the next—it is a Government in disarray. It has been roundly humiliated in the chamber this afternoon. Let me make it abundantly clear: the Government will never be forgiven for failing the pensioners of Scotland.

In light of the rather hurried statement that we have just had from Tom McCabe, there is no reason whatsoever for any member to vote against the motion in the name of John Swinney. I expect a unanimous vote in favour of the motion calling for full implementation of the Sutherland report.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Before we proceed, I must insist that members hear out members quietly and with courtesy.

David McLetchie (Lothians) (Con): I welcome in part the statement that has been made by Mr McCabe. It represents a victory for many people who have campaigned for the implementation of the Sutherland recommendation on personal care costs. I appreciate the fact that the Executive has listened on that point. In a sense, it represents a triumph for all those members—of all parties—who have campaigned for that initiative.

However, I would say that the Liberals have been bought off somewhat cheaply. If we read the motion that they were apparently intending to vote for later today, it calls for not only an "unequivocal commitment" to Sutherland, but

"a definite timetable for its implementation."

I may have misheard Mr McCabe, but I do not think that his statement included any such definite timetable for implementation. All we were told is that, some time after August, once the Executive has received the report of its development group, another set of proposals will emerge. What the Executive has said—although I welcome it in part—falls well short of what members of the Scottish Parliament intended to vote for. If the Liberal Democrats wish to maintain momentum on the issue and to achieve what many members seek, they should vote for the original motion, because it calls for a definite timetable, which is absent from Mr McCabe's statement.

Mr Keith Raffan (Mid Scotland and Fife) (LD): I would have preferred the Minister for Parliament's statement to have been made during this morning's debate, or even during First Minister's questions. That would have shown courtesy to the Parliament and to all its members.

I welcome the Executive's belated move in the right direction. Will the minister confirm that the Executive is now giving a clear, firm, unequivocal commitment to free personal care for all?

On the definite timetable—a question that I was going to raise even if Mr McLetchie had not mentioned it—will the minister now tell the chamber that the development working group, which was announced yesterday, will in August 2001 produce a definite timetable for the full implementation of that commitment, and that that statement will be made as soon as the Parliament resumes after the summer recess?

That was a question. I would like an answer to it.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We will now move to decision time.

Members: Oh!

Mr Raffan: On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Mr John Swinney (North Tayside) (SNP): On a point of order.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Mr Swinney, I was about to take Mr Raffan's point of order.

Mr Raffan: On a point of order, Presiding Officer. It is normal practice in this chamber to ask questions of the minister when a ministerial statement is made, which is why I put my response in the form of a question. I would be grateful if the Minister for Parliament could reply to it.

Mr McCabe: The Executive is unequivocally committed to bringing proposals to this chamber that will implement free personal care for all. Those proposals will allow every member of this chamber to take a decision which implements those proposals.

Members: When?

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We have to move to decision time.

Mrs Margaret Smith (Edinburgh West) (LD): On a point of order. Speaking as somebody who has enjoyed a great deal of consensus on this issue in the past, I would like us to speak with one voice on this issue today—

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Can we have a point of order?

Mrs Smith: We have delivered what we came to this Parliament to do, so I ask John Swinney to withdraw his motion, and the others to withdraw their amendments, to allow us—

The Deputy Presiding Officer: That is not a point of order, Mrs Smith.

Decision Time

17:18

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Patricia Ferguson): The first question is, that amendment S1M-1584.1.1, in the name of Mr Murray Tosh, which seeks to amend amendment S1M-1584.1, in the name of Sarah Boyack, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

Members: No.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I hear dissent, therefore there will be a division.

FOR

Adam, Brian (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Aitken, Bill (Glasgow) (Con)
Campbell, Colin (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Crawford, Bruce (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Cunningham, Roseanna (Perth) (SNP)
Davidson, Mr David (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Douglas-Hamilton, Lord James (Lothians) (Con)
Elder, Dorothy-Grace (Glasgow) (SNP)
Ewing, Dr Winnie (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Ewing, Fergus (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP)
Ewing, Mrs Margaret (Moray) (SNP)
Fabiani, Linda (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Fergusson, Alex (South of Scotland) (Con)
Gallie, Phil (South of Scotland) (Con)
Gibson, Mr Kenneth (Glasgow) (SNP)
Goldie, Miss Annabel (West of Scotland) (Con)
Grahame, Christine (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Hamilton, Mr Duncan (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Harding, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Hyslop, Fiona (Lothians) (SNP)
Ingram, Mr Adam (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Johnston, Nick (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Johnstone, Alex (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Lochhead, Richard (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
MacAskill, Mr Kenny (Lothians) (SNP)
MacDonald, Ms Margo (Lothians) (SNP)
Marwick, Tricia (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Matheson, Michael (Central Scotland) (SNP)
McGrigor, Mr Jamie (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
McGugan, Irene (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
McIntosh, Mrs Lyndsay (Central Scotland) (Con)
McLeod, Fiona (West of Scotland) (SNP)
McLetchie, David (Lothians) (Con)
Monteith, Mr Brian (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Morgan, Alasdair (Galloway and Upper Nithsdale) (SNP)
Mundell, David (South of Scotland) (Con)
Neil, Alex (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Paterson, Mr Gil (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Quinan, Mr Lloyd (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Robison, Shona (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Russell, Michael (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Scanlon, Mary (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Scott, John (Ayr) (Con)
Sheridan, Tommy (Glasgow) (SSP)
Sturgeon, Nicola (Glasgow) (SNP)
Swinney, Mr John (North Tayside) (SNP)
Tosh, Mr Murray (South of Scotland) (Con)
Ullrich, Kay (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Wallace, Ben (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Welsh, Mr Andrew (Angus) (SNP)
White, Ms Sandra (Glasgow) (SNP)
Wilson, Andrew (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Young, John (West of Scotland) (Con)

AGAINST

Alexander, Ms Wendy (Paisley North) (Lab)
Baillie, Jackie (Dumbarton) (Lab)
Barrie, Scott (Dunfermline West) (Lab)
Boyack, Sarah (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
Brankin, Rhona (Midlothian) (Lab)
Brown, Robert (Glasgow) (LD)
Butler, Bill (Glasgow Anniesland) (Lab)
Canavan, Dennis (Falkirk West)
Chisholm, Malcolm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab)
Craigie, Cathie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab)
Curran, Ms Margaret (Glasgow Baillieston) (Lab)
Deacon, Susan (Edinburgh East and Musselburgh) (Lab)
Eadie, Helen (Dunfermline East) (Lab)
Finnie, Ross (West of Scotland) (LD)
Galbraith, Mr Sam (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)
Gillon, Karen (Clydesdale) (Lab)
Godman, Trish (West Renfrewshire) (Lab)
Gorrie, Donald (Central Scotland) (LD)
Grant, Rhoda (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Gray, Iain (Edinburgh Pentlands) (Lab)
Harper, Robin (Lothians) (Green)
Henry, Hugh (Paisley South) (Lab)
Home Robertson, Mr John (East Lothian) (Lab)
Hughes, Janis (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab)
Jackson, Gordon (Glasgow Govan) (Lab)
Jamieson, Cathy (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab)
Jamieson, Margaret (Kilmarnock and Loudoun) (Lab)
Jenkins, Ian (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD)
Kerr, Mr Andy (East Kilbride) (Lab)
Lamont, Johann (Glasgow Pollok) (Lab)
Livingstone, Marilyn (Kirkcaldy) (Lab)
Lyon, George (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
Macdonald, Lewis (Aberdeen Central) (Lab)
Macintosh, Mr Kenneth (Eastwood) (Lab)
MacKay, Angus (Edinburgh South) (Lab)
MacLean, Kate (Dundee West) (Lab)
Macmillan, Maureen (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Martin, Paul (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab)
McAllion, Mr John (Dundee East) (Lab)
McAveety, Mr Frank (Glasgow Shettleston) (Lab)
McCabe, Mr Tom (Hamilton South) (Lab)
McConnell, Mr Jack (Motherwell and Wishaw) (Lab)
McLeish, Henry (Central Fife) (Lab)
McMahon, Mr Michael (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab)
McNeil, Mr Duncan (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab)
McNeill, Pauline (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab)
McNulty, Des (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab)
Morrison, Mr Alasdair (Western Isles) (Lab)
Mulligan, Mrs Mary (Linlithgow) (Lab)
Munro, Mr John (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD)
Murray, Dr Elaine (Dumfries) (Lab)
Oldfather, Irene (Cunninghame South) (Lab)
Peacock, Peter (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Peattie, Cathy (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Radcliffe, Nora (Gordon) (LD)
Raffan, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (LD)
Robson, Euan (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD)
Rumbles, Mr Mike (West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine) (LD)
Simpson, Dr Richard (Ochil) (Lab)
Smith, Elaine (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab)
Smith, Iain (North-East Fife) (LD)
Smith, Mrs Margaret (Edinburgh West) (LD)
Stephen, Nicol (Aberdeen South) (LD)
Stone, Mr Jamie (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
Thomson, Elaine (Aberdeen North) (Lab)
Wallace, Mr Jim (Orkney) (LD)
Watson, Mike (Glasgow Cathcart) (Lab)
Whitefield, Karen (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab)
Wilson, Allan (Cunninghame North) (Lab)

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The result of the division is: For 53, Against 69, Abstentions 0.

Amendment to the amendment disagreed to.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The second question is, that amendment S1M-1584.1, in the name of Sarah Boyack, which seeks to amend motion S1M-1584, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on roads of Scotland, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

Members: No.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: There will be a division.

FOR

Aitken, Bill (Glasgow) (Con)
Alexander, Ms Wendy (Paisley North) (Lab)
Baillie, Jackie (Dumbarton) (Lab)
Barrie, Scott (Dunfermline West) (Lab)
Boyack, Sarah (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
Brankin, Rhona (Midlothian) (Lab)
Brown, Robert (Glasgow) (LD)
Butler, Bill (Glasgow Anniesland) (Lab)
Chisholm, Malcolm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab)
Craigie, Cathie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab)
Curran, Ms Margaret (Glasgow Baillieston) (Lab)
Davidson, Mr David (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Deacon, Susan (Edinburgh East and Musselburgh) (Lab)
Douglas-Hamilton, Lord James (Lothians) (Con)
Eadie, Helen (Dunfermline East) (Lab)
Fergusson, Alex (South of Scotland) (Con)
Finnie, Ross (West of Scotland) (LD)
Galbraith, Mr Sam (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)
Gallie, Phil (South of Scotland) (Con)
Gillon, Karen (Clydesdale) (Lab)
Godman, Trish (West Renfrewshire) (Lab)
Goldie, Miss Annabel (West of Scotland) (Con)
Gorrie, Donald (Central Scotland) (LD)
Grant, Rhoda (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Gray, Iain (Edinburgh Pentlands) (Lab)
Harding, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Henry, Hugh (Paisley South) (Lab)
Home Robertson, Mr John (East Lothian) (Lab)
Hughes, Janis (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab)
Jackson, Gordon (Glasgow Govan) (Lab)
Jamieson, Cathy (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab)
Jamieson, Margaret (Kilmarnock and Loudoun) (Lab)
Jenkins, Ian (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD)
Johnston, Nick (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Johnstone, Alex (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Kerr, Mr Andy (East Kilbride) (Lab)
Lamont, Johann (Glasgow Pollok) (Lab)
Livingstone, Marilyn (Kirkcaldy) (Lab)
Lyon, George (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
Macdonald, Lewis (Aberdeen Central) (Lab)
Macintosh, Mr Kenneth (Eastwood) (Lab)
MacKay, Angus (Edinburgh South) (Lab)
MacLean, Kate (Dundee West) (Lab)
Macmillan, Maureen (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Martin, Paul (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab)
McAllion, Mr John (Dundee East) (Lab)
McAveety, Mr Frank (Glasgow Shettleston) (Lab)
McCabe, Mr Tom (Hamilton South) (Lab)
McConnell, Mr Jack (Motherwell and Wishaw) (Lab)
McGrigor, Mr Jamie (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
McIntosh, Mrs Lyndsay (Central Scotland) (Con)
McLeish, Henry (Central Fife) (Lab)
McLetchie, David (Lothians) (Con)
McMahon, Mr Michael (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab)
McNeill, Pauline (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab)
McNulty, Des (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab)
Monteith, Mr Brian (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Morrison, Mr Alasdair (Western Isles) (Lab)
Mulligan, Mrs Mary (Linlithgow) (Lab)
Mundell, David (South of Scotland) (Con)
Munro, Mr John (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD)
Murray, Dr Elaine (Dumfries) (Lab)
Oldfather, Irene (Cunninghame South) (Lab)
Peacock, Peter (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Peattie, Cathy (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Radcliffe, Nora (Gordon) (LD)
Raffan, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (LD)
Robson, Euan (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD)
Rumbles, Mr Mike (West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine) (LD)
Scanlon, Mary (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Scott, John (Ayr) (Con)
Sheridan, Tommy (Glasgow) (SSP)
Simpson, Dr Richard (Ochil) (Lab)
Smith, Elaine (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab)
Smith, Iain (North-East Fife) (LD)
Smith, Mrs Margaret (Edinburgh West) (LD)
Stephen, Nicol (Aberdeen South) (LD)
Stone, Mr Jamie (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
Thomson, Elaine (Aberdeen North) (Lab)
Tosh, Mr Murray (South of Scotland) (Con)
Wallace, Ben (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Wallace, Mr Jim (Orkney) (LD)
Watson, Mike (Glasgow Cathcart) (Lab)
Whitefield, Karen (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab)
Wilson, Allan (Cunninghame North) (Lab)
Young, John (West of Scotland) (Con)

AGAINST

Adam, Brian (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Campbell, Colin (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Canavan, Dennis (Falkirk West)
Crawford, Bruce (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Cunningham, Roseanna (Perth) (SNP)
Elder, Dorothy-Grace (Glasgow) (SNP)
Ewing, Dr Winnie (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Ewing, Fergus (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP)
Ewing, Mrs Margaret (Moray) (SNP)
Fabiani, Linda (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Gibson, Mr Kenneth (Glasgow) (SNP)
Grahame, Christine (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Hamilton, Mr Duncan (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Harper, Robin (Lothians) (Green)
Hyslop, Fiona (Lothians) (SNP)
Ingram, Mr Adam (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Lochhead, Richard (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
MacAskill, Mr Kenny (Lothians) (SNP)
MacDonald, Ms Margo (Lothians) (SNP)
Marwick, Tricia (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Matheson, Michael (Central Scotland) (SNP)
McGugan, Irene (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
McLeod, Fiona (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Morgan, Alasdair (Galloway and Upper Nithsdale) (SNP)
Neil, Alex (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Paterson, Mr Gil (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Quinan, Mr Lloyd (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Robison, Shona (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Russell, Michael (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Sturgeon, Nicola (Glasgow) (SNP)
Swinney, Mr John (North Tayside) (SNP)
Ullrich, Kay (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Welsh, Mr Andrew (Angus) (SNP)
White, Ms Sandra (Glasgow) (SNP)
Wilson, Andrew (Central Scotland) (SNP)

ABSTENTIONS

Reid, Mr George (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The result of the division is: For 86, Against 35, Abstentions 1.

Amendment agreed to.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The third question is, that motion S1M-1584, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on roads of Scotland, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

Members: No.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: There will be a division.

FOR

Aitken, Bill (Glasgow) (Con)
Alexander, Ms Wendy (Paisley North) (Lab)
Baillie, Jackie (Dumbarton) (Lab)
Barrie, Scott (Dunfermline West) (Lab)
Boyack, Sarah (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
Brankin, Rhona (Midlothian) (Lab)
Brown, Robert (Glasgow) (LD)
Butler, Bill (Glasgow Anniesland) (Lab)
Canavan, Dennis (Falkirk West)
Chisholm, Malcolm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab)
Craigie, Cathie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab)
Curran, Ms Margaret (Glasgow Baillieston) (Lab)
Davidson, Mr David (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Deacon, Susan (Edinburgh East and Musselburgh) (Lab)
Douglas-Hamilton, Lord James (Lothians) (Con)
Eadie, Helen (Dunfermline East) (Lab)
Fergusson, Alex (South of Scotland) (Con)
Finnie, Ross (West of Scotland) (LD)
Galbraith, Mr Sam (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)
Gallie, Phil (South of Scotland) (Con)
Gillon, Karen (Clydesdale) (Lab)
Godman, Trish (West Renfrewshire) (Lab)
Goldie, Miss Annabel (West of Scotland) (Con)
Gorrie, Donald (Central Scotland) (LD)
Grant, Rhoda (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Gray, Iain (Edinburgh Pentlands) (Lab)
Harding, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Henry, Hugh (Paisley South) (Lab)
Home Robertson, Mr John (East Lothian) (Lab)
Hughes, Janis (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab)
Jackson, Gordon (Glasgow Govan) (Lab)
Jamieson, Cathy (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab)
Jamieson, Margaret (Kilmarnock and Loudoun) (Lab)
Jenkins, Ian (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD)
Johnston, Nick (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Johnstone, Alex (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Kerr, Mr Andy (East Kilbride) (Lab)
Lamont, Johann (Glasgow Pollok) (Lab)
Livingstone, Marilyn (Kirkcaldy) (Lab)
Lyon, George (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
Macdonald, Lewis (Aberdeen Central) (Lab)
Macintosh, Mr Kenneth (Eastwood) (Lab)
MacKay, Angus (Edinburgh South) (Lab)
MacLean, Kate (Dundee West) (Lab)
Macmillan, Maureen (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Martin, Paul (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab)
McAllion, Mr John (Dundee East) (Lab)
McAveety, Mr Frank (Glasgow Shettleston) (Lab)
McCabe, Mr Tom (Hamilton South) (Lab)
McConnell, Mr Jack (Motherwell and Wishaw) (Lab)
McGrigor, Mr Jamie (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
McIntosh, Mrs Lyndsay (Central Scotland) (Con)
McLeish, Henry (Central Fife) (Lab)
McLetchie, David (Lothians) (Con)
McMahon, Mr Michael (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab)
McNeil, Mr Duncan (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab)
McNeill, Pauline (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab)
McNulty, Des (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab)
Monteith, Mr Brian (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Morrison, Mr Alasdair (Western Isles) (Lab)
Mulligan, Mrs Mary (Linlithgow) (Lab)
Mundell, David (South of Scotland) (Con)
Munro, Mr John (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD)
Murray, Dr Elaine (Dumfries) (Lab)
Oldfather, Irene (Cunninghame South) (Lab)
Peacock, Peter (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Peattie, Cathy (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Radcliffe, Nora (Gordon) (LD)
Raffan, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (LD)
Robson, Euan (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD)
Rumbles, Mr Mike (West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine) (LD)
Scanlon, Mary (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Scott, John (Ayr) (Con)
Sheridan, Tommy (Glasgow) (SSP)
Simpson, Dr Richard (Ochil) (Lab)
Smith, Elaine (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab)
Smith, Iain (North-East Fife) (LD)
Smith, Mrs Margaret (Edinburgh West) (LD)
Stephen, Nicol (Aberdeen South) (LD)
Stone, Mr Jamie (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
Thomson, Elaine (Aberdeen North) (Lab)
Tosh, Mr Murray (South of Scotland) (Con)
Wallace, Ben (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Wallace, Mr Jim (Orkney) (LD)
Watson, Mike (Glasgow Cathcart) (Lab)
Whitefield, Karen (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab)
Wilson, Allan (Cunninghame North) (Lab)
Young, John (West of Scotland) (Con)

AGAINST

Adam, Brian (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Campbell, Colin (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Crawford, Bruce (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Cunningham, Roseanna (Perth) (SNP)
Elder, Dorothy-Grace (Glasgow) (SNP)
Ewing, Dr Winnie (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Ewing, Fergus (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP)
Ewing, Mrs Margaret (Moray) (SNP)
Fabiani, Linda (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Gibson, Mr Kenneth (Glasgow) (SNP)
Grahame, Christine (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Hamilton, Mr Duncan (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Harper, Robin (Lothians) (Green)
Hyslop, Fiona (Lothians) (SNP)
Ingram, Mr Adam (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Lochhead, Richard (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
MacAskill, Mr Kenny (Lothians) (SNP)
MacDonald, Ms Margo (Lothians) (SNP)
Marwick, Tricia (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Matheson, Michael (Central Scotland) (SNP)
McGugan, Irene (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
McLeod, Fiona (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Morgan, Alasdair (Galloway and Upper Nithsdale) (SNP)
Neil, Alex (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Paterson, Mr Gil (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Quinan, Mr Lloyd (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Robison, Shona (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Russell, Michael (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Sturgeon, Nicola (Glasgow) (SNP)
Swinney, Mr John (North Tayside) (SNP)
Ullrich, Kay (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Welsh, Mr Andrew (Angus) (SNP)
White, Ms Sandra (Glasgow) (SNP)
Wilson, Andrew (Central Scotland) (SNP)

ABSTENTIONS

Reid, Mr George (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The result of the division is: For 88, Against 34, Abstentions 1.

Motion, as amended, agreed to.

Resolved,

That the Parliament recognises the strong concerns expressed by the local government consortia and trade unions about the award of the contracts for the management and maintenance of the trunk road network; in particular notes their concerns about the contract assessment process, the future operation of the trunk road services and the potential knock-on implications for local authorities, and calls upon the Executive to continue further exploration of all outstanding issues.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The fourth question is, that amendment S1M-1589.2, in the name of Dr Richard Simpson, which seeks to amend motion S1M-1589, in the name of Mr John Swinney, on personal care for the elderly, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

Members: No.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: There will be a division.

FOR

Alexander, Ms Wendy (Paisley North) (Lab)
Baillie, Jackie (Dumbarton) (Lab)
Barrie, Scott (Dunfermline West) (Lab)
Boyack, Sarah (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
Brankin, Rhona (Midlothian) (Lab)
Brown, Robert (Glasgow) (LD)
Butler, Bill (Glasgow Anniesland) (Lab)
Chisholm, Malcolm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab)
Craigie, Cathie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab)
Curran, Ms Margaret (Glasgow Baillieston) (Lab)
Deacon, Susan (Edinburgh East and Musselburgh) (Lab)
Eadie, Helen (Dunfermline East) (Lab)
Finnie, Ross (West of Scotland) (LD)
Galbraith, Mr Sam (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)
Gillon, Karen (Clydesdale) (Lab)
Godman, Trish (West Renfrewshire) (Lab)
Gorrie, Donald (Central Scotland) (LD)
Grant, Rhoda (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Gray, Iain (Edinburgh Pentlands) (Lab)
Henry, Hugh (Paisley South) (Lab)
Home Robertson, Mr John (East Lothian) (Lab)
Hughes, Janis (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab)
Jackson, Gordon (Glasgow Govan) (Lab)
Jamieson, Cathy (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab)
Jamieson, Margaret (Kilmarnock and Loudoun) (Lab)
Jenkins, Ian (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD)
Kerr, Mr Andy (East Kilbride) (Lab)
Lamont, Johann (Glasgow Pollok) (Lab)
Livingstone, Marilyn (Kirkcaldy) (Lab)
Lyon, George (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
Macdonald, Lewis (Aberdeen Central) (Lab)
Macintosh, Mr Kenneth (Eastwood) (Lab)
MacKay, Angus (Edinburgh South) (Lab)
MacLean, Kate (Dundee West) (Lab)
Macmillan, Maureen (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Martin, Paul (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab)
McAllion, Mr John (Dundee East) (Lab)
McAveety, Mr Frank (Glasgow Shettleston) (Lab)
McCabe, Mr Tom (Hamilton South) (Lab)
McConnell, Mr Jack (Motherwell and Wishaw) (Lab)
McLeish, Henry (Central Fife) (Lab)
McMahon, Mr Michael (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab)
McNeil, Mr Duncan (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab)
McNeill, Pauline (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab)
McNulty, Des (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab)
Morrison, Mr Alasdair (Western Isles) (Lab)
Mulligan, Mrs Mary (Linlithgow) (Lab)
Munro, Mr John (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD)
Murray, Dr Elaine (Dumfries) (Lab)
Oldfather, Irene (Cunninghame South) (Lab)
Peacock, Peter (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Peattie, Cathy (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Radcliffe, Nora (Gordon) (LD)
Robson, Euan (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD)
Simpson, Dr Richard (Ochil) (Lab)
Smith, Elaine (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab)
Smith, Iain (North-East Fife) (LD)
Smith, Mrs Margaret (Edinburgh West) (LD)
Stephen, Nicol (Aberdeen South) (LD)
Stone, Mr Jamie (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
Thomson, Elaine (Aberdeen North) (Lab)
Wallace, Mr Jim (Orkney) (LD)
Watson, Mike (Glasgow Cathcart) (Lab)
Whitefield, Karen (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab)
Wilson, Allan (Cunninghame North) (Lab)

AGAINST

Adam, Brian (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Aitken, Bill (Glasgow) (Con)
Campbell, Colin (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Canavan, Dennis (Falkirk West)
Crawford, Bruce (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Cunningham, Roseanna (Perth) (SNP)
Davidson, Mr David (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Douglas-Hamilton, Lord James (Lothians) (Con)
Elder, Dorothy-Grace (Glasgow) (SNP)
Ewing, Dr Winnie (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Ewing, Fergus (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP)
Ewing, Mrs Margaret (Moray) (SNP)
Fabiani, Linda (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Fergusson, Alex (South of Scotland) (Con)
Gallie, Phil (South of Scotland) (Con)
Gibson, Mr Kenneth (Glasgow) (SNP)
Goldie, Miss Annabel (West of Scotland) (Con)
Grahame, Christine (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Hamilton, Mr Duncan (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Harding, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Harper, Robin (Lothians) (Green)
Hyslop, Fiona (Lothians) (SNP)
Ingram, Mr Adam (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Johnston, Nick (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Johnstone, Alex (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Lochhead, Richard (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
MacAskill, Mr Kenny (Lothians) (SNP)
MacDonald, Ms Margo (Lothians) (SNP)
Marwick, Tricia (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Matheson, Michael (Central Scotland) (SNP)
McGrigor, Mr Jamie (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
McGugan, Irene (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
McIntosh, Mrs Lyndsay (Central Scotland) (Con)
McLeod, Fiona (West of Scotland) (SNP)
McLetchie, David (Lothians) (Con)
Monteith, Mr Brian (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Morgan, Alasdair (Galloway and Upper Nithsdale) (SNP)
Mundell, David (South of Scotland) (Con)
Neil, Alex (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Paterson, Mr Gil (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Quinan, Mr Lloyd (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Robison, Shona (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Russell, Michael (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Scanlon, Mary (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Scott, John (Ayr) (Con)
Sheridan, Tommy (Glasgow) (SSP)
Sturgeon, Nicola (Glasgow) (SNP)
Swinney, Mr John (North Tayside) (SNP)
Tosh, Mr Murray (South of Scotland) (Con)
Ullrich, Kay (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Wallace, Ben (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Welsh, Mr Andrew (Angus) (SNP)
White, Ms Sandra (Glasgow) (SNP)
Wilson, Andrew (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Young, John (West of Scotland) (Con)

ABSTENTIONS

Reid, Mr George (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The result of the division is: For 65, Against 55, Abstentions 1.

Amendment agreed to.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: As amendment S1M-1589.2 has been agreed to, amendment S1M-1589.1 has been pre-empted and falls.

The next question is, that motion S1M-1589, in the name of Mr John Swinney, on personal care for the elderly, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

Members: No.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: There will be a division.

FOR

Alexander, Ms Wendy (Paisley North) (Lab)
Baillie, Jackie (Dumbarton) (Lab)
Barrie, Scott (Dunfermline West) (Lab)
Boyack, Sarah (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
Brankin, Rhona (Midlothian) (Lab)
Brown, Robert (Glasgow) (LD)
Butler, Bill (Glasgow Anniesland) (Lab)
Chisholm, Malcolm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab)
Craigie, Cathie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab)
Curran, Ms Margaret (Glasgow Baillieston) (Lab)
Deacon, Susan (Edinburgh East and Musselburgh) (Lab)
Eadie, Helen (Dunfermline East) (Lab)
Finnie, Ross (West of Scotland) (LD)
Galbraith, Mr Sam (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)
Gillon, Karen (Clydesdale) (Lab)
Godman, Trish (West Renfrewshire) (Lab)
Gorrie, Donald (Central Scotland) (LD)
Grant, Rhoda (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Gray, Iain (Edinburgh Pentlands) (Lab)
Henry, Hugh (Paisley South) (Lab)
Home Robertson, Mr John (East Lothian) (Lab)
Hughes, Janis (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab)
Jackson, Gordon (Glasgow Govan) (Lab)
Jamieson, Cathy (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab)
Jamieson, Margaret (Kilmarnock and Loudoun) (Lab)
Jenkins, Ian (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD)
Kerr, Mr Andy (East Kilbride) (Lab)
Lamont, Johann (Glasgow Pollok) (Lab)
Livingstone, Marilyn (Kirkcaldy) (Lab)
Lyon, George (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
Macdonald, Lewis (Aberdeen Central) (Lab)
Macintosh, Mr Kenneth (Eastwood) (Lab)
MacKay, Angus (Edinburgh South) (Lab)
MacLean, Kate (Dundee West) (Lab)
Macmillan, Maureen (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Martin, Paul (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab)
McAllion, Mr John (Dundee East) (Lab)
McAveety, Mr Frank (Glasgow Shettleston) (Lab)
McCabe, Mr Tom (Hamilton South) (Lab)
McConnell, Mr Jack (Motherwell and Wishaw) (Lab)
McLeish, Henry (Central Fife) (Lab)
McMahon, Mr Michael (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab)
McNeil, Mr Duncan (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab)
McNeill, Pauline (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab)
McNulty, Des (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab)
Morrison, Mr Alasdair (Western Isles) (Lab)
Mulligan, Mrs Mary (Linlithgow) (Lab)
Munro, Mr John (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD)
Murray, Dr Elaine (Dumfries) (Lab)
Oldfather, Irene (Cunninghame South) (Lab)
Peacock, Peter (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Peattie, Cathy (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Radcliffe, Nora (Gordon) (LD)
Robson, Euan (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD)
Simpson, Dr Richard (Ochil) (Lab)
Smith, Elaine (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab)
Smith, Iain (North-East Fife) (LD)
Smith, Mrs Margaret (Edinburgh West) (LD)
Stephen, Nicol (Aberdeen South) (LD)
Stone, Mr Jamie (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
Thomson, Elaine (Aberdeen North) (Lab)
Wallace, Mr Jim (Orkney) (LD)
Watson, Mike (Glasgow Cathcart) (Lab)
Whitefield, Karen (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab)
Wilson, Allan (Cunninghame North) (Lab)

AGAINST

Aitken, Bill (Glasgow) (Con)
Davidson, Mr David (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Douglas-Hamilton, Lord James (Lothians) (Con)
Fergusson, Alex (South of Scotland) (Con)
Gallie, Phil (South of Scotland) (Con)
Goldie, Miss Annabel (West of Scotland) (Con)
Harding, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Harper, Robin (Lothians) (Green)
Johnston, Nick (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Johnstone, Alex (North-East Scotland) (Con)
McGrigor, Mr Jamie (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
McIntosh, Mrs Lyndsay (Central Scotland) (Con)
McLetchie, David (Lothians) (Con)
Monteith, Mr Brian (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Mundell, David (South of Scotland) (Con)
Scanlon, Mary (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Scott, John (Ayr) (Con)
Tosh, Mr Murray (South of Scotland) (Con)
Wallace, Ben (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Young, John (West of Scotland) (Con)

ABSTENTIONS

Adam, Brian (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Campbell, Colin (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Canavan, Dennis (Falkirk West)
Crawford, Bruce (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Cunningham, Roseanna (Perth) (SNP)
Elder, Dorothy-Grace (Glasgow) (SNP)
Ewing, Dr Winnie (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Ewing, Fergus (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP)
Ewing, Mrs Margaret (Moray) (SNP)
Fabiani, Linda (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Gibson, Mr Kenneth (Glasgow) (SNP)
Grahame, Christine (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Hamilton, Mr Duncan (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Hyslop, Fiona (Lothians) (SNP)
Ingram, Mr Adam (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Lochhead, Richard (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
MacAskill, Mr Kenny (Lothians) (SNP)
MacDonald, Ms Margo (Lothians) (SNP)
Marwick, Tricia (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Matheson, Michael (Central Scotland) (SNP)
McGugan, Irene (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
McLeod, Fiona (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Morgan, Alasdair (Galloway and Upper Nithsdale) (SNP)
Neil, Alex (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Paterson, Mr Gil (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Quinan, Mr Lloyd (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Reid, Mr George (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Robison, Shona (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Russell, Michael (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Sheridan, Tommy (Glasgow) (SSP)
Sturgeon, Nicola (Glasgow) (SNP)
Swinney, Mr John (North Tayside) (SNP)
Ullrich, Kay (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Welsh, Mr Andrew (Angus) (SNP)
White, Ms Sandra (Glasgow) (SNP)
Wilson, Andrew (Central Scotland) (SNP)

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The result of the division is: For 65, Against 20, Abstentions 36.

Motion, as amended, agreed to.

Resolved,

That the Parliament recognises that there are benefits in providing free personal care for the elderly; welcomes as a major step in this direction the further package of proposals announced by the Executive on 24 January 2001 which set out a process that will lead to a substantial extension of free personal care; notes that there are significant issues of cost and practicality in moving further and calls upon the Executive to broaden the terms of reference of the Development Group to require it to consider the practicalities, costs and implications of providing free personal care for all and to report by August 2001 with proposals that will inform the Executive's expenditure decisions for 2002-03 and beyond.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The final question is, that motion S1M-1574, in the name of Angus MacKay, on the general principles of the Budget (Scotland) (No 2) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

Members: No.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We have dissent, so there will be a division.

FOR

Alexander, Ms Wendy (Paisley North) (Lab)
Baillie, Jackie (Dumbarton) (Lab)
Barrie, Scott (Dunfermline West) (Lab)
Boyack, Sarah (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
Brankin, Rhona (Midlothian) (Lab)
Brown, Robert (Glasgow) (LD)
Butler, Bill (Glasgow Anniesland) (Lab)
Canavan, Dennis (Falkirk West)
Chisholm, Malcolm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab)
Craigie, Cathie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab)
Curran, Ms Margaret (Glasgow Baillieston) (Lab)
Deacon, Susan (Edinburgh East and Musselburgh) (Lab)
Eadie, Helen (Dunfermline East) (Lab)
Finnie, Ross (West of Scotland) (LD)
Galbraith, Mr Sam (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)
Gillon, Karen (Clydesdale) (Lab)
Godman, Trish (West Renfrewshire) (Lab)
Gorrie, Donald (Central Scotland) (LD)
Grant, Rhoda (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Gray, Iain (Edinburgh Pentlands) (Lab)
Harper, Robin (Lothians) (Green)
Henry, Hugh (Paisley South) (Lab)
Home Robertson, Mr John (East Lothian) (Lab)
Hughes, Janis (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab)
Jackson, Gordon (Glasgow Govan) (Lab)
Jamieson, Cathy (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab)
Jamieson, Margaret (Kilmarnock and Loudoun) (Lab)
Jenkins, Ian (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD)
Kerr, Mr Andy (East Kilbride) (Lab)
Lamont, Johann (Glasgow Pollok) (Lab)
Livingstone, Marilyn (Kirkcaldy) (Lab)
Lyon, George (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
Macdonald, Lewis (Aberdeen Central) (Lab)
Macintosh, Mr Kenneth (Eastwood) (Lab)
MacKay, Angus (Edinburgh South) (Lab)
MacLean, Kate (Dundee West) (Lab)
Macmillan, Maureen (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Martin, Paul (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab)
McAllion, Mr John (Dundee East) (Lab)
McAveety, Mr Frank (Glasgow Shettleston) (Lab)
McCabe, Mr Tom (Hamilton South) (Lab)
McConnell, Mr Jack (Motherwell and Wishaw) (Lab)
McLeish, Henry (Central Fife) (Lab)
McMahon, Mr Michael (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab)
McNeil, Mr Duncan (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab)
McNeill, Pauline (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab)
McNulty, Des (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab)
Morrison, Mr Alasdair (Western Isles) (Lab)
Mulligan, Mrs Mary (Linlithgow) (Lab)
Munro, Mr John (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD)
Murray, Dr Elaine (Dumfries) (Lab)
Oldfather, Irene (Cunninghame South) (Lab)
Peacock, Peter (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Peattie, Cathy (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Radcliffe, Nora (Gordon) (LD)
Robson, Euan (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD)
Simpson, Dr Richard (Ochil) (Lab)
Smith, Elaine (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab)
Smith, Iain (North-East Fife) (LD)
Smith, Mrs Margaret (Edinburgh West) (LD)
Stephen, Nicol (Aberdeen South) (LD)
Stone, Mr Jamie (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
Thomson, Elaine (Aberdeen North) (Lab)
Wallace, Mr Jim (Orkney) (LD)
Watson, Mike (Glasgow Cathcart) (Lab)
Whitefield, Karen (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab)
Wilson, Allan (Cunninghame North) (Lab)

ABSTENTIONS

Adam, Brian (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Aitken, Bill (Glasgow) (Con)
Campbell, Colin (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Cunningham, Roseanna (Perth) (SNP)
Davidson, Mr David (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Douglas-Hamilton, Lord James (Lothians) (Con)
Elder, Dorothy-Grace (Glasgow) (SNP)
Ewing, Dr Winnie (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Ewing, Fergus (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP)
Ewing, Mrs Margaret (Moray) (SNP)
Fabiani, Linda (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Fergusson, Alex (South of Scotland) (Con)
Gallie, Phil (South of Scotland) (Con)
Gibson, Mr Kenneth (Glasgow) (SNP)
Goldie, Miss Annabel (West of Scotland) (Con)
Grahame, Christine (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Hamilton, Mr Duncan (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Harding, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Hyslop, Fiona (Lothians) (SNP)
Ingram, Mr Adam (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Johnston, Nick (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Johnstone, Alex (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Lochhead, Richard (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
MacAskill, Mr Kenny (Lothians) (SNP)
MacDonald, Ms Margo (Lothians) (SNP)
Marwick, Tricia (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Matheson, Michael (Central Scotland) (SNP)
McGrigor, Mr Jamie (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
McGugan, Irene (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
McIntosh, Mrs Lyndsay (Central Scotland) (Con)
McLetchie, David (Lothians) (Con)
Monteith, Mr Brian (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Morgan, Alasdair (Galloway and Upper Nithsdale) (SNP)
Mundell, David (South of Scotland) (Con)
Neil, Alex (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Paterson, Mr Gil (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Quinan, Mr Lloyd (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Reid, Mr George (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Robison, Shona (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Russell, Michael (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Scanlon, Mary (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Scott, John (Ayr) (Con)
Sheridan, Tommy (Glasgow) (SSP)
Sturgeon, Nicola (Glasgow) (SNP)
Swinney, Mr John (North Tayside) (SNP)
Tosh, Mr Murray (South of Scotland) (Con)
Ullrich, Kay (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Wallace, Ben (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Welsh, Mr Andrew (Angus) (SNP)
White, Ms Sandra (Glasgow) (SNP)
Wilson, Andrew (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Young, John (West of Scotland) (Con)

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The result of the division is: For 67, Against 0, Abstentions 52.

Motion agreed to.

That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Budget (Scotland) (No 2) Bill.

Points of Order

17:25

Michael Russell (South of Scotland) (SNP): On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The confusion about what we were voting on in this afternoon's proceedings—arising from the fact that we were not voting on the minister's statement and did not know whether the statement could be questioned—raises considerable questions for the chamber. I see that the convener of the Procedures Committee is in his place. I ask you and your fellow Presiding Officers to reflect on what took place this afternoon and to seek a referral to the Procedures Committee so that we are never again in the position where the procedure confuses members and—I believe—abuses the Parliament.

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Patricia Ferguson): Presiding Officers, as of habit, review most of their decisions, so I am sure that we can comply with your request, Mr Russell.

We move to decision time.

I am sorry—I am the one who is confused now. We move to members' business.

Mr Keith Raffan (Mid Scotland and Fife) (LD): On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I appreciate that the statement was exceptional, but I agree with Mr Russell. It should be clear in future, in exceptional circumstances such as this, whether statements are subject to questions. That is crucial, for the clarity of what is going on, in our interests and in the interests of the people we represent.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I have taken your point, Mr Raffan.

Robert Burns

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Patricia Ferguson): The final item of business today is a members' business debate on motion S1M-1506, in the name of David Mundell, on Robert Burns.

Motion debated,

That the Parliament recognises the immeasurable contribution which the life and works of Robert Burns have made to the history and culture of Scotland; commends the activities of the Robert Burns World Federation, individual Burns' Clubs and the many other organisations and individuals who are dedicated to preserving and promoting Burns' memory and work in Scotland and abroad, and believes that the Scottish Executive should do all it can to ensure that the maximum educational, cultural and economic, particularly from tourism, benefits are gained by the people of Scotland from Robert Burns' global legacy.

17:27

David Mundell (South of Scotland) (Con): I have been flicking through my Burns tome to see whether he had some suitable words for what has happened today, but even he would be at a loss for words for the preceding events.

On the way to the chamber this afternoon, members will have passed one of the many places where Burns stayed during his time in Edinburgh 215 years ago. I do not know what Burns would have made of the Scottish Parliament; others may choose to speculate during the debate. However, he was certainly here at the birth, when Sheena Wellington so movingly sang "A Man's a Man for a' that." All members—on that day at least—echoed the sentiment:

"It's coming yet for a' that.
That man to man, the world o'er
Shall brithers be for a' that."

However, I like to think that Burns, with a roguish smile, is looking down on us, thinking that his lines from "To a Louse" are appropriate for politicians:

"O wad some Pow'r the giftie gie us
To see oursels as others see us!
It wad frae monie a blunder free us
An' foolish notion."

What the Parliament can do for Burns is to recognise his importance and—not just today—to celebrate his life and works. Voted Scot of the millennium in recent polls, he is a man who should be at the heart of our culture. His place as our leading literary figure should not be in doubt; nor should it depend on fashion or the latest fad among the luvvies in the arts organisations. His memory and his work are to be treasured. We must put in the resources that will do that, rather than leaving the burden on the shoulders of volunteers and enthusiasts. Institutions such as

Scottish Enterprise and the Scottish Tourist Board, along with the Executive, have a significant role to play.

Presiding Officer, you will be relieved to hear that I will not be delivering an immortal memory—according to the Scottish Tourist Board website, an immortal memory should last 25 minutes. The website says:

"A briefer time is considered sketchy and only the most gifted can command the interest of a company beyond half an hour".

Therein lies one of the principal issues that I want to highlight tonight. Although the Scottish Tourist Board's website offers the casual browser tips on holding a do-it-yourself Burns supper, a search for the name Robert Burns on visitscotland.com does not bring up any details of where to go or what to see, although it gives details of 200 other sites to visit. Surely it is ridiculous that more tourist information about Burns is available on sites operated by private individuals in north America than through our own publicly funded organisations.

We must not underestimate the global significance of the name Robert Burns. His life and work is celebrated not just here in his own country, but in every corner of the world. As Scots, we should be proud of that inheritance, but we must not be so proud that we do not take advantage of it. We must find ways of bringing direct benefits to Scotland from his global recognition in the same way that our friends in England have been able to market Shakespeare. After all, the average north American knows Burns's version of "Auld Lang Syne" far better than any Shakespeare sonnet.

One such individual is Jeremy Boot, who strikes a particular chord with me when he says on his website:

"I have come to Burns' work late. I am not an expert on the subject; I have created these pages for enjoyment and in the hope that it may inspire the reader to dig further."

I, too, am not an expert, but I have grown older—shockingly, to an age older than Burns when he died—and I have come to understand the wide range of Burns's work, which I am sure individual members will highlight, from gentle love songs such as "Ae Fond Kiss" and "My Luve's like a Red, Red Rose" to the raucous, rhythmic "Tam o' Shanter". "Tam o' Shanter" contains my favourite lines, never better delivered, in my view, than by the late Bill Dunlop of the Kilwinning Burns club:

"But pleasures are like poppies spread,
You seize the flower, its bloom is shed;
Or like the snow falls in the river,
A moment white—then melts for ever;
Or like the borealis race,
That flit ere you can point their place;
Or like the rainbow's lovely form
Evanishing amid the storm."

Not just Burns's words, but his life, are as relevant to us today as they were 250 years ago. We are now a nation obsessed with soap operas, but Burns's life had more real ups and downs, more twists and turns, more loves and griefs, more depth and sheer humanity than any of the modern television dramas from which we are supposed to learn how to cope with our everyday problems. Phil and Grant Mitchell could learn a thing or two from Robert Burns, and we must ensure that, through our school curriculum, young people throughout Scotland also have the opportunity to do so.

At the moment, much of what happens in our schools is down to the Robert Burns World Federation, and I welcome its chief executive, Shirley Bell, to the gallery and pay tribute to her work. [MEMBERS: "Hear, hear."] Her organisation supports Burns clubs around the world with no public funding other than the support of East Ayrshire Council. That must change if this Parliament takes preserving and promoting the Burns legacy seriously. I hope that the Deputy Minister for Sport and Culture will recognise that.

In the preface to the first edition of his works in 1786, Burns stated that if

"after a fair, candid and impartial criticism, he shall stand convicted of dullness and nonsense, let him be done by as he would in that case do by others—let him be condemned, without mercy, to contempt and oblivion."

Although some outside the chamber might cruelly suggest that such a fate awaits some members of this Parliament, it is not true of Robert Burns. His legacy is global and his persona iconic. Let us toast his memory by supporting the motion.

17:35

Cathy Jamieson (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab): Members will be aware that I have been uncharacteristically quiet this week and they will notice that I am suffering from a loss of voice. My constituency—Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley—contains Alloway, the birthplace of Burns, and Mauchline, where he lived a considerable part of his life. It also contains a number of other locations that are close to the hearts of all Burns enthusiasts. I therefore felt that life would not be worth living if I did not overcome the problems that I face in speaking today and make a short contribution to the debate.

I thank David Mundell for lodging the motion that has allowed us to have this debate. I am glad that he acknowledged the work of East Ayrshire Council in supporting the work of the Burns federation. I also thank South Ayrshire Council for the work that it has done to promote the Burns national heritage park in Alloway and for the other work that is done in local schools throughout Ayrshire. As a former pupil of an Ayrshire school, I well know the amount of work that was done to give young people a lifelong interest in the life and works of Robert Burns.

David Mundell was right about the need to build on the whole of Burns's life and work to enable us to appreciate our culture and to see it as an integral part of our economic development processes, particularly tourism.

Margaret Jamieson (Kilmarnock and Loudoun) (Lab): Will Cathy Jamieson take an intervention?

Cathy Jamieson: I certainly will; I think that it will help my voice.

Margaret Jamieson: It will give it a wee rest.

Does Cathy Jamieson agree that financial partnership with the Scottish Executive would aid the emerging local partnership in Kilmarnock between the Kilmarnock Standard, Klin Contracts Ltd and East Ayrshire Council to reinstate and open the Burns monument in Kay park in Kilmarnock to many Burns enthusiasts, thereby contributing to the Ayrshire economy?

Cathy Jamieson: I very much agree that that kind of partnership is the way forward. The Burns monument in Kilmarnock is one initiative that could be taken forward. There are opportunities to develop other areas, such as Mauchline. There is, of course, a national Burns monument in Mauchline. There are also the Jean Armour homes and the Burns museum, which, as far as I understand it, relies totally on a trust fund to keep going. The museum is not only filled with Burns memorabilia; it is the home of an incredible collection of Mauchline ware and curling stones. We have talked about things of national significance in relation to the museums audit. I hope that the minister will give some comfort to those who have run such initiatives voluntarily over many years and say that we will work towards a strategy in future that puts Burns at the centre of developments. I hope that we can look forward to hearing about progress on that when the minister responds to the debate.

Mrs Margaret Ewing (Moray) (SNP): The member spoke about the Burns heritage, in which Ayrshire plays a significant part. In asking the minister about promotion, I request that we talk not only about the poems and songs of Burns, which are well renowned, but about the letters of Burns, which constitute one of the most fascinating pieces of social history in our country.

Cathy Jamieson: Absolutely; I agree to the extent that I will finish on this point. When I was preparing to give a reply to the toast to the lasses at a Burns supper at the weekend, I got so carried away reading some of the letters that I forgot that I was supposed to be writing a speech.

David Mundell mentioned the website that tells people how long an immortal memory should be. However, I found no such guidance on the reply to the toast to the lasses, although I found out that I was supposed to be nice to men, which of course, I always am. We talk about the fact that a man's a man for a' that, but I remind people that Burns also gave a mention to the rights of women. Many of the women here—Cathy Peattie and others—will, I am sure, expand on that during the debate.

17:39

Fergus Ewing (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP): Politicians are often in receipt of advice and sometimes even take advice. It seems to me that Robert Burns gave us all some of the best advice when he wrote in his address to the Scottish members of Parliament in his day the following lines:

"In gath'rin votes you were na slack,
Now stand as tightly by your tack:
Ne'er claw your lug, an' your back,
An' hum an' haw,
But raise your arm, an' tell your
Before them a'."

Reflecting on the events of the past 48 hours, I think that it would have been much more straightforward if a simple plan had been in a manifesto and had been promptly delivered after the election. That was the advice that Robert Burns gave. In our heart of hearts, we all know that it is valuable advice, which we will ponder for many a while.

I congratulate David Mundell on lodging the motion. I do so for many reasons. When Burns is celebrated, it is by the people. Burns suppers have lived on as an expression of the support of the Scottish people for our national bard for all these years. Many people criticise Burns suppers, but I have always found that to be elitist and muddleheaded. Surely, if our people gather to celebrate Burns, it does not matter whether the dinners are formal or informal, posh or couthie, in the community hall or in the Hilton Hotel. The fact is that people gather to celebrate the memory of our bard. If some jokes are of a blue nature, we do not mind; in this chamber, we all laugh. We celebrate Burns in many different ways.

When "Burns: The Movie" is made, I make a special plea to ministers that it is made not in Ireland or Hollywood but in our own country, perhaps even with a Scottish actor—Sean Connery is perhaps a bit old for the part, but I am sure that there will be many other contenders.

Mr Jamie Stone (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD): Duncan Hamilton.

Fergus Ewing: Duncan Hamilton has been suggested. I know that he has many talents, but I do not know whether acting is one of them.

I will conclude by being non-controversial, as always. In response to the question whether Burns was a nationalist, there is only one answer—obviously, patently, demonstrably and incontrovertibly yes. Why? Because he wrote these words, which I will sing:

"Fareweel to' our Scottish fame,
Fareweel our ancient glory;
Fareweel even to the Scottish name,
Sae fam'd in martial story!"

Members will know the rest of the words; they are on the SNP CD, which is now remaindered, but still available.

I hope that we can all join in toasting the bard at Burns suppers that we attend this year.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I must admit that that is the second time at a members' business debate that I have been obliged to turn a blind ear to what is going on in the chamber.

Fergus Ewing: On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it not the case that you are required to turn a blind ear only when singing occurs?

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I was about to say that I may have been able to make an obvious exception in this case, but Mr Ewing beat me to it.

17:43

Ian Jenkins (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD): Presiding Officer, you should turn a deaf eye to the standing orders and allow Cathy Peattie to sing. Fergus Ewing, for all his talents, is no Cathy Peattie or Sheena Wellington.

Mrs Margaret Ewing: Thank goodness for that.

Ian Jenkins: At the risk of over-egging the haggis, I thank

"My lov'd, my honour'd, much respected friend"

David Mundell, with his "honest, sonsie face", for securing this debate today and allowing Parliament to pay tribute to the immortal memory of Robert Burns and the undying legacy that is his work.

It is 30 years almost to the day since I was first asked to propose the immortal memory at a formal Burns supper—the Peeblesshire Burns supper. After I had accepted, I was told that the speakers in the two previous years had been David Steel and Hugh MacDiarmid. I was so intimidated at that young age by the status of the people who had preceded me that I decided that I would have to be very clever and academic, so I did a great big study about Robert Burns and Henry Mackenzie, the man of feeling and all that kind of stuff. I bored the people to death—so much so that the Peeblesshire Burns club folded afterwards and never had another Burns supper.

Robert Burns is indeed one of Scotland's truly international treasures, whose work appeals to readers of all ages, classes and nationalities. For example, although my father was not a bookish person, he loved Burns, particularly the wee out-of-the-way bits. When I became a teacher, he used to quote a poem about a teacher who would go to hell when he died. The poem runs:

"Here lie Willie Michie's banes:
Oh Satan, when ye tak him,
Gie him the schulin o your weans,
For clever deils he'll mak them!"

He always said to me, "When you go to hell, you'll need to teach these weans."

One of my happiest Burns memories is a lunch that I attended at St Ronan's Primary School in Innerleithen. The youngsters went through the whole Burns supper procedure with tremendous energy and knowledge, on a spot where Burns spent a night during his Borders tour.

Last September, I had the privilege to speak at the formal dinner of the annual conference of the Robert Burns World Federation, which was held—I am happy to say—at the Peebles Hydro. I mentioned the event at St Ronan's school because it featured the kind of recitations of Burns and other Scottish verse that had been inspired by competitions sponsored by the federation. I also welcomed the conference in the full knowledge that the organisation was a massively important agency for taking a vital element of Scottish culture to all corners of the globe and for providing a hugely significant source of promotion for Scotland, its culture and traditions and the hospitality, conviviality and values that would draw admirers of Burns, their relatives and their friends to our shores and so boost our economy.

Throughout that meal, I sat beside Shirley Bell—to whom David Mundell has already referred—and agreed with her argument that the Robert Burns World Federation should be recognised as a positive, established organisation whose cultural work and role as an ambassador for Scotland deserved the support of the Scottish Parliament. This year's conference will be held in Atlanta, Georgia, where, incidentally, there is a replica of Burns's cottage. I wish the federation well in that conference and hope and believe that its activities will produce good results for us all in improving our knowledge of our culture and in ensuring that visitors return to Scotland. I hope to welcome the federation back to Peebles in the near future.

Of course I urge the Executive and the Scottish Tourist Board to push ahead in new directions. However, I hope that we can recognise Robert Burns's importance in our living culture and the equal importance of building on our existing cultural assets.

People have taken Burns's words to heart across the world—"Auld Lang Syne" has been mentioned. When I used to teach "Of Mice and Men"—which was one of the best things I ever did—the kids were amazed to find out that the title came from the Burns poem "To a Mouse". Of course, members have also mentioned "A Man's a Man for a' that".

Robert Burns is the brightest star in our cultural firmament. When we are seeking new things, we must not forget the established culture and reputation that we can build on.

17:48

Phil Gallie (South of Scotland) (Con): I will begin with an example of Robert Burns's panache. He meant all things to all men. Fergus Ewing claimed Burns as a nationalist, but I refer Fergus to the Dumfries volunteers—that example undoubtedly shows Burns stressing his unionist interests. Furthermore, Burns supported a Tory candidate in Dumfries in a local council by-election. That demonstrates another point. Many members would quite rightly highlight Burns's socialist credentials. However, one of the things about Burns that we can proud of is that he means something different to each and every one of us.

I take issue with Cathy Jamieson. I am sure that Robert Burns would turn in his grave if he knew that Alloway had been taken out of the Ayr constituency at the previous election and put into Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley.

Cathy Jamieson: I want to give Mr Gallie some information. Alloway is indeed in my constituency, which covers part of Ayrshire. In those terms, Alloway is still in Ayr.

Phil Gallie: I take that point. Burns would probably turn in his grave at that as well.

John Scott (Ayr) (Con): I thank David Mundell for securing this debate and point out that what was true 225 years ago is still true:

"Auld Ayr, wham ne'er a town surpasses
For honest men and bonie lasses".

I suggest that there should be a Burns supper in Ayrshire every night of the year. I would like the tourist board—with the help of colleagues from Ayrshire—to consider that suggestion.

Phil Gallie: I am sure that all members would agree with that. We welcome all Burns suppers in Ayrshire; at this time of year, there is one virtually every night of the week. Perhaps when we move into the tourist season, John Scott's suggestion could be taken up.

We are told that, 242 years ago, on the day on which Robert Burns was born, the wind blew the end of the cottage in and the handsel disappeared. Some things never change. The weather in Ayrshire over recent months has been reminiscent of that day.

Ayrshire has produced many skilled and expert people—engineers, scholars, innovators and sportsmen—but none is identified on the worldwide scene so much as Robert Burns. No one else's birthday is celebrated the world over—with the exception of the celebration of Christmas—which says something about Robert Burns. Undoubtedly, Robert Burns is a great asset to Scotland, and our tourist industry will certainly ignore Scotland's interests if it does not maximise that asset.

I make a final suggestion. Prestwick airport has recently been taken over by a new local consortium. I wish it well. Perhaps it could start by renaming Prestwick international airport the Burns international airport.

17:52

Dorothy-Grace Elder (Glasgow) (SNP): I have much enjoyed this debate, which has lightened the atmosphere after the previous business.

I have many links with Burns. One cannot help but bump into Burns, wherever one goes in the world—the man is a megastar. In Scotland, we still do not fully appreciate just how big our global megastar is. Back in 1996, I thought that the celebrations for the Burns bicentennial year were going to be big. Even Pavarotti was going to come to Scotland. However, the organisers had a budget of peanuts and the man who was running the national Burns festival had only one phone in an office in Ayr. We must upgrade the way in which we treat Burns, in line with the great efforts of the enthusiasts.

There are more than 2,000 different books about Robert Burns. His work has been translated into more than 90 languages—the latest Chinese edition, in Mandarin, sold 180,000 copies in the first two days of publication. The traffic lights at pedestrian crossings in some Japanese cities play "Comin' Thro' the Rye". There are more than 1,500 statues of Burns throughout the world and 5,000 marble busts in libraries and public parks. No one else has had so many statues and busts made of them, apart from Columbus, the discoverer of the new world. Lenin used to be up there, but he is being pulled down all the time—and we are very grateful for that.

Touching moments come with Burns. The other night, in the Gorbals, I attended what I would call the multi-storey Saturday night. It was not intended to have the atmosphere of "The Cotter's Saturday Night", but that is exactly what it had. Ordinary people were gathering together in a community flat in the Gorbals for the first Burns supper that they had ever organised. This beautiful cake—I invite members to see the love that has been put into it—was made for the occasion by Jean Sechaud and her friend Isobel McCue, who have started a charity there to help people to make cakes and fancy confectionery. We all really enjoyed ourselves. There was karaoke Burns as well—Burns a-go-go. He would have loved it, bless his heart. We must bring Burns to younger generations.

I have a quick anecdote about Russia and how Burns can touch people's hearts to this day. A couple of years ago, I was in a wood outside St Petersburg with a bunch of drunks. It was not a Parliamentary outing—we go to Inverness. The people in the wood were recovering alcoholics. I was interviewing them through an interpreter called Vladimir Thomson—I have not made up that name. I asked those chaps, who had all been in jail, how they first got into trouble. My banal question was tortuously interpreted into Russian to one young man. This lad, who did not otherwise speak a word of English, pushed away the interpreter. He looked straight at me and said:

"Inspiring bold John Barleycorn!
What dangers thou canst make us scorn!"

There were tears in his eyes because he, who had no English and had been educated in a poor Russian state school, could communicate with me, who had little Russian, through Robert Burns—and he gave the perfect reply.

Presiding Officer, as a bit of good will today, after all the sniping that we have had this afternoon, I would like to present you with this cake, which you can share with the other Presiding Officers and especially with the long-suffering clerks.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Thank you very much.

Mr David Davidson (North-East Scotland) (Con): On a point of order. As it is my birthday today as well, can I have a bit, please?

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I am not sure how many rules in the standing orders we have broken. I call Jamie Stone.

Members: Cheese!

17:57

Mr Jamie Stone (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD): When I was a child in the Highlands—and I am sure that this will also have been the case when Alasdair Morrison was a child—Burns suppers took place but not to a great extent. Since then, with the arrival of incomers from Glasgow and so on to build oil rigs and suchlike, Burns suppers have taken off in my area and we now have many. My act, which I have performed for some years and which I keep being asked to do, is the toast to the lasses. I did one last week and Nancy Nicholson, the BBC agriculture broadcaster, gave the wittiest reply I have ever heard. She mangled me; she ate me up and spat me out. She was an object example to all the lasses.

Mary Scanlon (Highlands and Islands) (Con): Given that Mr Stone is so experienced in proposing the toast to the lasses, does he agree with what Burns wrote on the hand of nature in "Green Grow the Rashes":

"Her prentice han' she try'd on man,
An' then she made the lasses, O"?

Mr Stone: As Mary Scanlon knows, I am keen on the lasses O and something of an aficionado. When giving the toast to the lasses some five years ago, I misjudged my audience, who were elderly people and who had had perhaps one quarter of a glass of sherry each. I told a joke about transplants—I shall go no further than that—and got 16 letters of complaint. I have never been asked back to that place.

Cheese was mentioned. Burns suppers are about food and fellowship. They are a reminder that we are all Jock Tamson's bairns. Fergus Ewing has rightly pointed out that, be the suppers in a village hall or in the Hilton, they are for everyone. What is particularly good about Burns suppers is that they are about food, fellowship, wit and laughter at one of the darkest times of the year, when we are all feeling a bit down and are looking forward to spring. They are good for us and put a spring in our step at a time when there might not otherwise be one.

Fiona Hyslop (Lothians) (SNP): I was brought up in Alloway and I am pleased to contribute to the debate. Burns should not be only about Burns suppers in January. The point has been made that we should make more of Burns throughout the year, particularly for children. I attended Alloway primary school, which has successfully promoted Burns.

Mr Stone: That is a fair point. We should look at it this way: if we can increase exports of whisky and haggis from places such as my constituency, that must be a good thing.

Fiona Hyslop is quite right. I look forward to the day when we have TV Burns suppers being eaten all year round. We heard a beautifully sung song from Fergus Ewing—although I would ask for notice of when he will sing again; the Presiding Officer has been presented with a delicious cake and we have heard about Mr Davidson's birthday. I therefore invite you, Presiding Officer, to come and have a glass of whisky with me and Mr Davidson in Deacon Brodie's after the debate.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: In election times, I think that that is called treating.

18:00

Dr Elaine Murray (Dumfries) (Lab): I have a constituency interest to declare. Robert Burns lived the last few years of his life in Dumfries. Sadly, he passed away at the early age of 37, his death partly brought on by bathing in the Solway, which was apparently prescribed as a treatment for chest trouble. I am pleased that medical services in Dumfries and Galloway have improved significantly since then.

In the election to which Mr Gallie referred, the successful candidate's name was Murray. Although I may be the first female to represent Dumfries, I am not the first Murray to do so—which is rather surprising, given that Murray is not a Borders name.

David Mundell correctly referred to the work of the Robert Burns World Federation and of the individual Burns clubs in keeping alive the works of the poet. Burns lived in a time of great political and cultural change, and tasked himself with preserving for the appreciation of future generations many of the traditional Scottish songs and much of the music that might otherwise have been lost. To their great credit, the Burns societies and clubs have carried on that good work to ensure that successive generations of young Scots will enjoy the music and poetry of previous centuries.

Like many parents, I have been involved in rehearsals of Burns's poetry over the past few days. In the case of our family, it was the "Address to the Tooth-Ache". In these days of a McDonald's-oriented, predominantly transatlantic culture, it was a rare pleasure to share with my son something of lowland Scotland's traditional language and humour.

More than two centuries on, Burns speaks to us on universal subjects such as passion, loss, inequality, endurance, the environment and human weakness. In his countryside, his experiences and in his and his fellow man's frailty, we recognise our countryside, our experiences and our frailty. All politicians like to believe that Burns, had he been alive, would have been a supporter of their particular political party. I find much in his later works in particular—which were written in Dumfries—to support my notion that he was a socialist.

On that note, I cannot resist advertising the fact that the biggest Labour movement Burns supper takes place in Dumfries every year. It is organised by my constituency Labour party. This very Saturday, we will be entertained in words and, I hope, in music by Cathy Peattie MSP. There may yet be a small number of tickets available.

Mr Stone: Can I come?

Dr Murray: You would be most welcome, Jamie.

Whatever Robert Burns's politics may have been, I am sure that he would have been pleased that "A Man's a Man for a' That", which was composed in Dumfries in 1795, was sung at the official opening of the Parliament—despite the fact that a parcel o' rogues like us went and joined in.

Two years ago, my daughter was charged with designing a poster to attract tourists to a Scottish town. She came up with the slogan, "Come to Dumfries—deathplace of Robert Burns", which, for whatever reason, has not yet been adopted by the area tourist board.

18:03

Dr Winnie Ewing (Highlands and Islands) (SNP): I thank David Mundell. This has been one of the jolliest moments that I have experienced in the life of the Parliament.

We have a phenomenon that belongs to us—a man who is respected and quoted from one end of the world to the other. I have been to some amazing Burns suppers around the world. Some in Tanzania, Hong Kong, Canada and America come to mind—not to mention all those that I have been to in Scotland.

Burns was not just a poet, of course. That is what is so appealing. He was also an historian. Some of his poems about history, including "The Lovely Lass of Inverness", are absolutely heart-rending.

Mr Stone: There she is, Winnie: it is Mary Scanlon.

Dr Ewing: He was also a humorist and a satirist—"Holy Willie's Prayer" is said to be one of the most brilliant pieces of satire ever written. It was Professor Daiches who said that. Burns was also a philosopher. There are hundreds of books that take their titles from Burns—"Of Mice and Men" is just one example. As has been said, he was also an egalitarian. I suggest that he was an internationalist and a nationalist.

Scratch any Scot, and you will find that he can recite Burns, and most can recite a lot. Most can sing some—like Fergus.

There are no Shakespeare suppers—why do we have the Burns supper phenomenon? I suggest that it is because Burns shared all his thoughts and opinions in his letters, so we are in no doubt about his thoughts on every subject and person. He was also a great romantic. For the benefit of our heritage, he was a great song collector. All by himself, he was an unpaid school of Scottish studies. Apart from the hundreds of songs that he wrote, he collected hundreds more. He never charged for the songs that he collected. He said that they were either above or below price, and he would not take money for them. He collected with the greatest assiduity. He found fragments of "Scots, wha hae" all over Scotland and argued that it was the march played at Bannockburn, which it turns out was the case. It was also the march that was played when Joan of Arc entered Orléans, when it was called "La Marche des soldats écossais".

Burns was a most intellectual song collector, and we are the beneficiaries of the hundreds that he collected. I will not sing, although I think I sing as well as Fergus.

It has been suggested that Burns was not a nationalist. However, he wrote:

"O would, I had seen the day
That Treason thus could us,
My grey head had in clay,
Wi' Bruce and loyal Wallace!
pith and power, my last hour,
I'll this declaration;
We're bought and sold for English gold
Such a parcel o' rogues in a nation!"

18:07

Cathy Peattie (Falkirk East) (Lab): I had not intended to speak this afternoon, but I could not resist doing so. I thank David Mundell for this opportunity to celebrate Burns. It is great to have a cake, but it does not seem right to talk or sing about Burns without a dram.

I think that Burns was an internationalist and a socialist. I remember reading Maya Angelou describe how Burns inspired her as a child, growing up in deprivation in a racist part of America. She said that reading Burns and hearing his story gave her hope. It is special that someone such as Maya Angelou should say that.

There are Burns suppers all over the world. Like Fergus Ewing, I think that there is nothing wrong with a Burns supper. It is good to get folk together to sing and celebrate Burns.

I think that Burns had a great empathy for the working people, both men and women, of his time. People say, "Och, well, we know what Burns was like," but Cathy Jamieson is right: immediately I start to read Burns, I forget what I sat down to do, and then discover that it is 1 o'clock and I have not written anything. It is important that people should read Burns, as he had great empathy for people and their struggle.

With permission, I will sing a few lines from a couple of songs. In "Ye banks and braes", Burns shows empathy for a young woman who had been desperately in love with a young man and has been left with a thorn—a babbie. The woman is chastised by her family and all the folk in the community. When I learned "Ye banks and braes" when I was growing up, I thought that it was a jolly wee song, but when one thinks about it, one realises how special it is.

"Ye banks and braes o' bonie Doon,
How can ye bloom sae fresh and fair?
How can ye chant, ye little birds,
And I sae weary fu' o''care!
Thou'll break my heart, thou warbling bird,
That wantons thro' the flowering thorn:
Thou minds me o' departed joys,
Departed never to return."

There are a lot of songs like that one in Burns's book.

Like Winnie Ewing, for me the greatest celebration of Burns is what he has done for Scots and traditional music. There are more than 300 songs in the books and there are different versions of those songs in different parts of the country. They exist because Burns travelled around the country, gathering songs and pulling them together—from this ane and that ane; for this tune and that tune. He gave them life, and we hold on to them.

When we consider what is happening in our schools, it is important that we remember that those traditional songs are significant. They were not written for folk such as Pavarotti, as they were not meant to sound like something from an opera. They were people's songs and songs for people to sing.

Let us go back to Burns's politics. Burns hated hypocrisy, and my favourite verse is "Thanksgiving for a National Victory":

"Ye hypocrites are these your pranks?
To murder men, and give God thanks?
Desist for shame and go no further;
God won't accept your thanks for murder!"

Any socialist would have been delighted to be in the chamber when the wonderful Sheena Wellington sang at the opening of the Parliament. I cannot leave this evening without singing the last verse of "For a' that and a' that". If we had some drams and all night, we could sing all Burns's songs.

"Then let us pray that come it may,
As come it will for a' that,
That Sense and Worth, o'er a' the earth
Shall bear the gree, and a' that
For a' that, and a' that,
It's comin yet for a' that,
That Man to Man the warld o'er,
Shall brothers be for a' that."

Let us hope that we keep celebrating Burns and that we encourage every bairn and everyone else in Scotland to celebrate him, not just on 25 January but throughout the year. [Applause.]

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Before I call the minister to wind up the debate, I thank those members who spoke in the debate for the inspiration that they have given me. If I tell you that I am replying to a toast to the lassies that is to be proposed by our colleague Frank McAveety, you will understand why I need the inspiration.

I call Allan Wilson.

Mr Stone: Will the minister give us a song?

18:13

The Deputy Minister for Sport and Culture (Allan Wilson): In all seriousness, I do not think that I could follow Cathy Peattie. I have no cake, either.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Next time.

Allan Wilson: It might have been misinterpreted as an attempt to curry favour with members. [Laughter.] Members will get there eventually.

I congratulate David Mundell and the other members who have spoken in what must have been the best debate in the Parliament to date. I also welcome Shirley Bell back to the Parliament.

It is apt that we discuss Burns on this particular night, when many thousands of his admirers throughout the world sit down to pay tribute to his memory. His works, which have been so extensively and so eloquently quoted by members during the debate, have been enormously influential in the development of Scotland's cultural heritage. A number of members made the point that his works have been central to the formation of our identity and of Scotland's image throughout the world. Dorothy-Grace Elder remarked that they have been translated into 90 languages; they were also translated into Gaelic by the late, great Rev Roderick Macdonald.

The mark of a great poet is that he is not just of his own time and place but captures the imagination of people in many times and in many places. No other poet has captured the hearts and minds of people from all walks of life, across all classes of society and in all parts of the globe, as Robert Burns has done. Tonight, thousands of people—not just expatriate Scots but myriad nationalities such as Russian and Japanese—will toast his immortal memory.

Many of those people will be members of the Robert Burns World Federation, which, as members have heard, has more than 80,000 members throughout the world in more than 300 affiliated clubs. I congratulate the federation on the admirable work it carries out, in the celebration of Burns's memory and achievements and in the study of Scotland's literature and language. I certainly recognise the need to help the federation.

Much, of course, has already been done to support Burns's legacy. The Association for Scottish Literary Studies, funded by the Scottish Arts Council, has recently announced a new children's creative writing competition, which will be run jointly with the Burns federation. The competition is open to pupils in S1 and S2 and the first awards are to be made this spring.

Many members will have read The Herald magazine article about James Cosmo's plans to make a film about Burns's life. It was Fergus Ewing, I think, who made a reference to the film, which is one of a number of film projects being monitored by Scottish Screen. I understand that Scottish Screen has already had informal discussion to see how it might best be able to assist. I am scheduled to meet James Cosmo after the initial discussion that we had at the Scottish BAFTA—British Academy of Film and Television Arts—awards last month, to try to make progress with the project.

David Mundell: Name-dropper!

Allan Wilson: There is a vacancy for the lead part. David Mundell will be welcome to audition.

We have also recognised Burns's undoubted appeal to Scotland—

Ian Jenkins: Sorry, minister, but when you meet James Cosmo, could you tell him that his old English teacher was asking for him.

Allan Wilson: Not that Ian Jenkins is name-dropping or anything.

Dorothy-Grace Elder: I am appreciating the minister's speech. I hope, as he moves in such starry circles, that he is not going to cast Madonna as Jean Armour.

Allan Wilson: I think that we will leave the casting to the professionals.

Last year, the new tourism action plan for Scottish Enterprise Ayrshire identified Burns as a brand icon that should be developed. That will be integrated into the board's business plan, the new Ayrshire and Arran tourism strategy and the service level agreement. I think that that was a reference to the double act of the Jamiesons—Cathy and Margaret—behind me.

Those are important initiatives and opportunities on which we must build. Alasdair Morrison and I realise that we cannot rest on our laurels. We have already met David Mundell and Shirley Bell. Only this week, we have discussed how we might work together to help the federation to continue its excellent work and to make the most of the opportunities that the its worldwide membership affords. As a result of that meeting, Alasdair and I are looking at ways in which we can help the federation to access business advice and support from the enterprise networks.

I have said that I recognise the case for supporting the international Burns federation. I am determined that the few individuals who have, for many years, carried that federation are assisted. It makes eminent sense that the Executive assists in a way that benefits Scotland as well as the federation.

I have to correct David Mundell on the visitscotland.com website, which I printed off before this debate. It has links to more than 16,000 ideas for holidays in Scotland, 8,500 places to stay and 2,500 events to choose from.

I make this pledge to David Mundell and all the members who have stayed on tonight: Alasdair Morrison and I are determined that this debate will not be like the snowflake in the verse that David quoted from "Tam o' Shanter". Our commitment will not be ephemeral. It will not be here today and gone tomorrow, but will be part of a determined process to recognise the bard's unique contribution not only to our cultural heritage but to our contemporary economy. So watch this space for future announcements.

Meeting closed at 18:19.

Session 1 (2002)

Scottish Parliament
Official Report

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

9 May 2002

CONTENTS

Thursday 9 May 2002

Debates


VOLUNTARY SECTOR
Motion moved—[Johann Lamont].
Johann Lamont (Glasgow Pollok) (Lab)
Linda Fabiani (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh (Central Scotland) (Con)
Robert Brown (Glasgow) (LD)
Karen Whitefield (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab)
Tricia Marwick (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Helen Eadie (Dunfermline East) (Lab)
Mr Brian Monteith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Cathy Peattie (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Mr Mike Rumbles (West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine) (LD)
Christine Grahame (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Cathie Craigie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab)
Donald Gorrie (Central Scotland) (LD)
Murdo Fraser (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Robin Harper (Lothians) (Green)
Mr Keith Raffan (Mid Scotland and Fife) (LD)
Bill Aitken (Glasgow) (Con)
Colin Campbell (West of Scotland) (SNP)
The Deputy Minister for Social Justice (Hugh Henry)
Mr Kenneth Gibson (Glasgow) (SNP)
NEW NATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS
Statement—[Cathy Jamieson].
The Minister for Education and Young People (Cathy Jamieson)
POINT OF ORDER
BUSINESS MOTION
Motion moved—[Euan Robson]-and agreed to.
The Deputy Minister for Parliamentary Business (Euan Robson)
QUESTION TIME
SCOTTISH EXECUTIVE
Ayr United Heathfield Stadium
Bell Baxter High School
Child Benefit (Truancy)
Child Poverty
Criminal Justice (Crimes with Knives)
European Union (Scottish Representation)
National Health Service Boards
Race Relations (Amendment) Act 2000 (Education)
Research Parks (Ayrshire)
Special Educational Needs
Supervision Costs
VisitScotland (Meetings)
FIRST MINISTER'S QUESTION TIME
"A Smart, Successful Scotland"
Cabinet (Meetings)
McCrone Agreement
NURSES
Motion moved—[Malcolm Chisholm].
Amendment moved—[Nicola Sturgeon].
Amendment moved—[Mary Scanlon].
The Minister for Health and Community Care (Malcolm Chisholm)
Nicola Sturgeon (Glasgow) (SNP)
Mary Scanlon (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Mrs Margaret Smith (Edinburgh West) (LD)
Sarah Boyack (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
Mr Kenneth Gibson (Glasgow) (SNP)
Mr Jamie McGrigor (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Brian Fitzpatrick (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)
Alex Neil (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Donald Gorrie (Central Scotland) (LD)
Janis Hughes (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab)
Robin Harper (Lothians) (Green)
Tommy Sheridan (Glasgow) (SSP)
George Lyon (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
Ben Wallace (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Brian Adam (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
The Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care (Mrs Mary Mulligan)

PARLIAMENTARY BUREAU MOTIONS
Motions moved—[Euan Robson].
DECISION TIME
EUROPE DAY
Motion debated—[Irene Oldfather].
Irene Oldfather (Cunninghame South) (Lab)
Dr Winnie Ewing (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Ben Wallace (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Mr Keith Raffan (Mid Scotland and Fife) (LD)
Richard Lochhead (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
David Mundell (South of Scotland) (Con)
Mr Lloyd Quinan (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Helen Eadie (Dunfermline East) (Lab)
Nora Radcliffe (Gordon) (LD)
Irene McGugan (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
The Deputy Minister for Finance and Public Services (Peter Peacock)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

9 May 2002
Scottish Parliament

Thursday 9 May 2002

[THE PRESIDING OFFICER opened the meeting at 09:30]

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): Before we begin this morning's proceedings, I have to inform the Parliament, under rule 4.8, that Her Majesty has accepted the resignation as minister of Wendy Alexander and made the appointments approved yesterday of Margaret Curran and Frank McAveety.

Voluntary Sector

The Presiding Officer: This morning's business is a Social Justice Committee debate on motion S1M-3063, in the name of the convener, Johann Lamont, on the committee's inquiry into the voluntary sector.

09:30

Johann Lamont (Glasgow Pollok) (Lab): I begin with something of an apology. I am suffering from a bad cold this morning. Although I thought that I would embrace the notion of having 20 minutes to speak rather than my usual four, when I have to speak like a steam train to get through the business, I am now beginning to feel rather wonky—I think that that is the phrase. I apologise in advance for any woolly words, and assure members that those woolly words do not reflect woolly thinking on the part of the committee but are entirely my own responsibility.

I am pleased to have the opportunity to present the Social Justice Committee's report to the Scottish Parliament and trust that it will provide important information, food for thought and challenges to all those who are involved in and with the voluntary sector. As the Presiding Officer mentioned, we have a new Minister for Social Justice and I take this opportunity to congratulate Margaret Curran on her new role and to congratulate and welcome Hugh Henry as the new Deputy Minister for Social Justice. I look forward to having the same productive working relationship with him that we have had with previous ministers and deputy ministers.

I thank the clerks, the Scottish Parliament information centre, the official report and all those who supported the development of the report. I also thank all those who gave evidence and contributed to the inquiry, both formally and informally.

The aim of the report was to establish the key issues facing the voluntary sector in Scotland in 2001, to examine the response of the Scottish Executive and others to those issues, and to report and make recommendations, as appropriate, to the Parliament. The report of the inquiry was intended to update committee members and the Parliament as a whole on the current position of the voluntary sector in Scotland, to provide a snapshot of the voluntary sector upon which the committee could base future work, and to identify key issues and recommendations to be addressed by the Scottish Executive and key players in the voluntary sector. I trust that people will find that the report matches up to those aims and objectives.

I want to say something about the process by which we undertook our inquiry. We did not seek to take evidence from only the key players in the voluntary sector and the Executive—from organisations such as the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations and key figures such as Jean McFadden—although their contribution was welcome. We also sought to reflect in our evidence taking the diversity of the voluntary sector that we often celebrate. We met a range of organisations throughout Scotland by setting up meetings in each of the eight regions, determined as we were to ensure that that diversity could be reflected in what we heard from people in the voluntary sector.

I thank the councils for voluntary services for facilitating those meetings, and all those who were engaged in the process. I acknowledge the consensual approach of committee members, who did not feel it necessary to ensure that all political parties were represented at each of those meetings, but were willing to delegate responsibility to two or three members. It was clear that all the committee members who were involved saw themselves as taking part in those meetings on behalf of the committee rather than pursuing the agenda that they might have pursued at other times. I congratulate all committee members who were involved in that process. I conducted an inquiry in my constituency, modelled on the same approach of going out and contacting local communities. I found that useful and I believe that our approach was very much in line with the vision of an open and transparent Parliament that we often hear about.

Reflecting on the evidence that we gathered, particularly at local level, we were struck by a number of things. We were struck by the willingness of all to engage in the process, because of their commitment to the sector and, perhaps more important, because of their commitment to the individual areas of work in which they were involved. We were also struck by the huge energy of those who were represented and by what they had to say and what they wanted to communicate about the key role that they clearly play in their local communities. The most compelling factor in the evidence gathering was the consistency of comments across the country—in rural areas, in urban areas and everywhere in between—about the sector's key priorities and frustrations. The report is intended to reflect the depth of evidence and, in the priority that it gives to individual recommendations, it seeks to reflect the consistency of comments and concerns.

I cannot comment on all the points that are made in the report, but I am sure that all members are now extremely familiar with it. I shall select a few points for comment and I am sure that other members will highlight areas that are of importance to them.

I have no doubt that the experience of everyone in this chamber as an elected member will be the same as my own. In going about the business of engaging with our constituents, in pursuing issues in our constituencies and in seeking to represent our constituents, we have made contact with and worked with the voluntary sector in all its splendid diversity. There is no doubt that the voluntary sector is in an important position to deliver a social justice agenda. Indeed, voluntary organisations have proved that they have a key role in developing appropriate solutions to many of the problems that face our communities. We wish to celebrate that diversity and the capacity of the sector to drive policy developments. We want to recognise that the voluntary sector is very often ahead of the agenda in seeking solutions to problems in our communities.

Much of our current social justice agenda takes an approach that has been developed from the experience of people in local communities. Child care is a key example of that. Child care provision emerged from what was needed locally and has become the norm in relation to what the Scottish Executive and others see as important.

The report highlights key issues. We had an interesting session on charity law reform, when we heard evidence from Jean McFadden. It is the committee's view that it is essential that that matter is pursued, and we would like a commitment from the Executive and a timetable for addressing the points that are made in the report.

Important work was done on the social economy review, and again we expect the Executive to identify a timetable for moving that review onward. Our commitment to the importance of the social economy review is reflected in our view that there should be recognition of where the voluntary sector and the co-operative and mutual sector meet. In any review of the social economy, important work should be done on the role of the co-operative and mutual sector. Although that sector is distinct from the voluntary sector, they clearly impact one upon the other and we would like a commitment from the Executive to consider that relationship in the review.

The strength of the voluntary sector is that many groups have evolved directly from an identification of local needs. The process is not top down, and that must be recognised in relationships between the voluntary sector and local authorities, other funding partners and the Scottish Executive. It is very much the view of the committee that those partnerships must be developed out of mutual respect. In our view, it is not appropriate for the Scottish Executive, or any other funding organisation, to use the voluntary sector as a means only of delivering its own agenda. Voluntary organisations should have a role in determining that agenda in the first place, particularly given their track record of being able to understand the key issues in their communities or areas of interest.

In acknowledging the role of the voluntary sector, we must ensure that we do not reduce the voluntary sector simply to being another service provider. In embracing the voluntary sector, we must ensure that we do not squeeze the life-blood out of it. For example, in seeking a more businesslike approach from those who are involved in voluntary child care, we may lose the flexibility that made that child care provision work for local communities and individual families. In demanding standards in training and regulations—which we all agree are necessary—it is essential that we do not simply develop a professionalisation of the voluntary sector that drives away volunteers and loses the very heart of what the voluntary sector contributes to our communities.

Many groups and organisations commented on the problems of consultation. We welcome the importance of real partnership, but it is clearly important that consultation, too, is real and not tokenistic. There must be an opportunity for feedback and what is said must be taken on board in a real way. If we think that the voluntary sector has something serious to say, consultation is all the more important. Real consultation makes it more likely that what comes out of the other end of the process will reflect what is actually needed in local communities. The committee recognises that we must avoid paralysis by consultation. Organisations that are already stretched and strained may see consultation only as a burden and not as a benefit.

It will be no surprise that the issue that was constantly raised and highlighted in our evidence taking and work was funding. There was a desire and demand at the heart of the discussion for honesty on all sides about what can be delivered with the moneys that are provided. There was a sense that sometimes there was a desire to squeeze a dividend—a wee bit extra—out of the money that was given. There needs to be honesty about the training that is required and its cost implications. It is inappropriate for organisations not to have funding security. If important responsibility for service delivery is delegated to the voluntary sector, it is crucial that security is provided to allow organisations to plan, especially as we have made a commitment to giving the voluntary sector a key role in planning. The sector's opportunity to deliver a service must be built on strong foundations. I am sure that all members have horror stories of organisations that seek to pay their staff through having raffles. If something is unacceptable in the public sector, it should be unacceptable in the voluntary sector.

Another key issue in respect of funding relates to the frustration that is felt at the need for voluntary organisations persistently to reinvent the wheel. We must be clear. The importance of innovation is recognised and the voluntary sector can be an important test-bed for trying out new ideas and opportunities—indeed, the voluntary sector has an excellent record in that respect. However, it is nonsense that effective organisations should have to recreate and reinvent themselves and attach innovative approaches to effective work to secure new funding. There must be a means of getting the balance right.

Mr Keith Raffan (Mid Scotland and Fife) (LD): On that point, and what the member said about a process that is not top down but bottom up, does she agree that there is an urgent need for the sharing of best practice and good projects so that we do not continue to reinvent the wheel? We must stimulate or help to stimulate a bottom-up process so that coverage is not patchy. It should not be good in some areas and not so good in other areas.

Johann Lamont: I absolutely agree. We have all experienced the frustration of tackling problems or issues in our communities as if no one has ever tackled them before—indeed, we may have started processes that have been proven to be weak elsewhere. I agree that the communication of good practice must be supported. Perhaps if there were less emphasis in funding on what is new, we could build up confidence around good practice. I emphasise that the voluntary sector is an important sector in which to test out new ideas. One is not absolutely thirled to such ideas at a later stage as a result of committing oneself to an approach.

We acknowledge the role of the voluntary sector in rural areas. Other members have more detailed knowledge of such work than I do, but it is clear that there are specific difficulties in rural areas in sustaining, accessing and benefiting from the voluntary sector. Our report reflects the fact that much work needs to be done in that respect. It also acknowledges that many problems relating to accessibility, isolation and the capacity and confidence to volunteer are replicated in some of our most urban, deprived areas. There are issues relating to ensuring that we can engage as many of our communities as possible. The issue does not involve simply geography, but other exclusion issues.

Mr Mike Rumbles (West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine) (LD): Does Johann Lamont agree that rural poverty and deprivation are often exacerbated by the isolation of people from specific communities? In more urban areas, many more people live together and can help to support one another. In rural areas, there is the added perspective of isolation.

Johann Lamont: I do not want to diminish the importance of rural poverty, but I am not sure whether the argument is about the experience of poverty in one community as opposed to that in another. The issues relate to poverty. In urban areas, it might be contended that, where density of poverty, exclusion, problems with transport links and few people who are able to work exist, a different process operates. I agree that there are issues around rural poverty and accessing help, which our report sought to address.

I am happy to say that I will finish well ahead of time. The voluntary sector deserves more than cosy words—it deserves our respect. It is not the equivalent of the Women's Guild, or a cosy, let-us-all-get-together-and-have-a-hug sector. Many people who are engaged in the voluntary sector are involved in the hardest work and deal with the most difficult problems. They support people who are in the most difficult circumstances. People who go into volunteering activity do not do so because they think that it might be a good thing. They may do so because they have received direct benefit from other people giving of themselves for no other reason than that something needed to be done, whether in Marie Curie Cancer Care or any other organisation. People are involved for many reasons, which are not always easy. The voluntary sector deserves recognition for the hard job that it does in difficult circumstances. We should acknowledge and celebrate the importance of its work in our communities.

We should not patronise those who work in the voluntary sector, but build on the work that has been done and the work that has proven to be effective. We should take seriously what the voluntary sector in Scotland told us in its clear voice in giving evidence, particularly in relation to funding. The sector has a right to stable, realistic and consistent funding, not just for the opportunity to innovate, but because of its capacity to consolidate.

We must build trust and an understanding of the pressures on the voluntary sector that are the result of regulation and training. We agree with the need for regulation and training, but we must acknowledge the problem and listen when what has been decided begins to have an adverse effect on communities. Local voluntary activists in my constituency have reported to me their anxieties that the level of regulation and training may mean that people will walk away. People in my community will be devastated if groups that are supported in that community lose important activists. There must be real engagement with such issues.

A voluntary sector that can be a significant engine room for the social justice agenda must be allowed. It should not only carry out our agenda, but develop and shape that agenda. That will benefit all our communities—rural and urban and those that are in between.

I thank all those who were involved in the report. I trust that all those who read it with interest will take on board what it says and adopt its points where they have influence. I welcome the Executive's response and commend the report to the chamber.

I move,

That the Parliament notes the Social Justice Committee's 1st Report 2002, Report on Inquiry into the Voluntary Sector (SP Paper 531).

09:47

Linda Fabiani (Central Scotland) (SNP): I was going to congratulate Margaret Curran on her ministerial elevation, but she is not here. I congratulate Hugh Henry and welcome him to the social justice portfolio. I do not know whether he has been elevated or if the move is a side step. This is the fourth social justice team, so I wish him the best of luck.

As a member of the Social Justice Committee, I am pleased to have contributed to the report on the voluntary sector. Today, however, I am speaking on behalf of the SNP.

I want to pick up on something that Johann Lamont said, which is crucial to an understanding of the voluntary sector. She spoke about the diversity of the voluntary sector. There are too many perceptions about what the voluntary sector is. People can volunteer for an hour or two every week and do a variety of tasks, but there are also businesses that are run by voluntary committee members, which are also part of the voluntary sector. Being voluntary does not mean being amateur—it means being professional and providing a good service.

Last night, I visited an after-school care project in Blacklaw. For 10 years, the project has been run entirely voluntarily by local people who act as employers and employ staff. The project has been totally self-funded. It should always be borne in mind that the voluntary sector is a professional part of our social economy.

Like colleagues, I received the Scottish Executive's response to the committee's report quite late last night. As the First Minister said, personalities go, but the work carries on. It is unfortunate if the unexpected departure of a minister prevented the earlier distribution of the response, which is important. I note that it took a full two months for the Executive, with all its resources, to respond to the committee's report. Ministers should reflect on the fact that voluntary organisations that have more limited resources must respond to many Executive consultations in two months or less. Johann Lamont said that some of the respondents to the inquiry spoke about consultation fatigue and I think that that question has to be considered.

The Scottish National Party is supportive of the report, the findings of which are broadly in line with what our members have been hearing from volunteers and voluntary organisations for some years. As someone who has spent most of her working life employed in the voluntary sector and working with volunteers, I can see from the report that many of the issues have not changed in the past five, 10 or even 15 years.

I do not have time to cover the full range of issues highlighted in the report but, of course, there are key issues of concern to which I would like to draw attention. The first is the biggy: funding. The distribution of Scottish Executive funds is a major issue for the voluntary sector. Particular concern was expressed about the lack of core funding and continuing funding for successful projects and also about the fact that there is little recognition of the difficulties that are faced by small organisations when the expected funding does not appear. Despite the supportive words in the Executive's response, all the evidence suggests that the situation will continue to be business as usual. Voluntary organisations have experienced yet another delay in their funding this year. I ask the minister to explain why the decisions on section 9 and section 10 grants did not go out until after the beginning of this financial year and urge him to try to understand the effect that uncertainty of funding has on voluntary organisations. It results in worry for and pressure on the volunteers and the service users.

Robert Brown (Glasgow) (LD): Does Linda Fabiani think that the major problem for most voluntary organisations lies with the Scottish Executive, as she appears to be suggesting, or with health boards, local authorities and other local funders?

Linda Fabiani: I accept the point that Robert Brown is making and I will deal with that element later. However, I point out that good examples and best practice have to come from the top.

Uncertainty in funding can lead to demoralised, overworked and frustrated employees. It is horrifying that many of those who work in the voluntary sector receive redundancy notices as a matter of routine. We heard about that in evidence that was given to the committee. Given that the Executive has an annual underspend of more than double the total funding that it gives to the voluntary sector, surely we can rectify the situation.

The evidence of the voluntary sector is that, even when the Executive wants to give away money, it cannot always do so. Would the minister please do what is now commonly known as a McConnell and pledge that this will never happen again? Voluntary groups should be told before the beginning of the year how much money they will receive and should be able to rely on that money arriving on time.

I found the Executive's response on the mainstreaming of voluntary issues a bit disappointing. I note that the Executive is

"committed to promoting and mainstreaming voluntary sector issues"

but what has been achieved? The response talks about working groups, review groups, an issues unit and a management board—and let us not forget that there is a leaflet that is updated annually. It seems that voluntary issues are no more mainstream now than they were in the Scottish Office. That has to be considered carefully.

If the minister wants evidence that nothing has changed, he need look only at the Executive's response to recommendation 6. The committee said that voluntary groups should not have to reinvent themselves to secure funding, as the convener of the committee and Keith Raffan said earlier this morning. The Executive responds to that point by immediately reinforcing the issue of innovation. It is that concentration on innovation in Scottish Executive funding that forces groups to reinvent themselves. We have to stop talking about innovation and start talking about best practice. Voluntary groups do some things better than the state does. They should be encouraged with consistent funding and a well-developed national and local infrastructure. The evidence is that voluntary organisations innovate because they are responsive to local and individual problems rather than because the public purse dangles a carrot in front of them.

Local authorities now have three-year rolling budgets, so there should be no difficulty in providing a similar arrangement for the funding that local authorities provide to voluntary organisations. I am glad to see that the Executive says in its response that it has accepted that, and I am sure that we can look forward to local authorities providing that peace of mind.

As Robert Brown pointed out, voluntary organisations are funded by other sources, such as health boards, too. Recently, with regard to money from the Community Fund, many voluntary organisations have told me about the difficulties that exist in relation to the innovation that is required to secure those funds, too. I have also heard about the difficulty of getting information when grant applications are turned down. The Community Fund appears to say simply that a project has run its course, is no longer innovative and will receive no more funding. In East Kilbride, a wonderful project for adults with severe learning difficulties had to close its doors because it could get no more funding from the Community Fund. The galling part of that is that the Community Fund has not told the group why that happened. The letter that was sent to the group said something like, "There is no point in your contacting us because we do not have to tell you why we are turning down your further application." I ask the minister to examine some of those problems.

Mr Raffan: Does Linda Fabiani agree that we must find a way to bring together the statutory bodies, such as health boards and local authorities, so that we can avoid duplication and overlap? I think that we are beginning successfully to do that through initiatives such as drug action teams, which bring together all the interested bodies to ensure that all the funding is focused in the way that it should be for the local area.

Linda Fabiani: Mr Raffan is right. We need to find ways to cut the bureaucracy. We also need to cut out a lot of the buzz phrases. We can talk about community planning and partnership working, but we need to focus our efforts on the people who are getting the service and providing the service and take it from there. How can the needs of those groups best be serviced?

Before leaving the issue of local infrastructure, I want to comment on social inclusion partnerships. Increasingly, those bodies should be a source of joined-up delivery of support to the voluntary sector at a local level. It is important, therefore, that their decision making is transparent and can stand scrutiny. I have asked a series of questions recently on SIPs and it appears that there is still much to do in relation to establishing those bodies. For example, there was no requirement for a register of interest for members of SIP boards before April this year. Having the register is a step forward, but there are still no sanctions for use against anyone who conceals an interest. The burden for keeping the registers has fallen on local authorities, who are obliged to ensure that all members declare any relevant interest.

It is disappointing that the Executive's response to recommendation 8 fails to address the issue of regulation. To be effective, regulation must be transparent, consistent and backed up by sanctions.

SIPs are perceived in different ways by different people and we have all heard anecdotal evidence about them. However, a perception that patronage exists or that there is a lack of accountability is almost as important as the problems themselves, whether they exist or not, because it puts people off and stops people benefiting from the project. The Social Justice Committee is considering examining SIPs more closely. I would welcome that and I would also welcome the Executive more closely examining the issue of the regulation of SIPs so that everyone can be confident that they are providing what they should be.

Johann Lamont mentioned the final issue that I want to touch on, which is the importance to the voluntary sector of the review of charity law. In 1999, when this Parliament was in its infancy, Wendy Alexander, who was Minister for Communities at the time, promised a reform of charity law in Scotland, which was welcomed across the chamber. She set up the McFadden commission, which reported a year ago. We now know that the commission rushed out its report unnecessarily and that nothing will happen, it would seem, until after the next election. Jean McFadden was clearly disappointed at the lack of action and was reported in Third Force News as saying:

"If we had known that nothing was going to happen the commission could have had an extra few months putting more details on to some of the recommendations."

She went on to say:

"I spoke to ... Jim Wallace and told him of my concerns ... He said there were certain aspects of the recommendations which were 'controversial' and needed more discussion."

If the McFadden commission had not been forced to rush out its report, perhaps that controversy would not exist.

I am reliably informed that work on the promised review of the social economy has not moved forward since Jackie Baillie's time in the social justice ejector seat, which seems a long time ago. It is a bit worrying that the minister who now has responsibility for the Executive's economic strategy showed so little interest in economic development in his previous role. Members have been waiting for me to use the I-word: independence. My party and I believe that it will take independence for Scotland to have real control over its economy, social or otherwise. The key instruments for economic development in Scotland rest in London. However, it is clear that the voluntary sector has a key role to play in local economic development. I ask the minister to give us a commitment to put the review of the social economy back on track—or is the review another of Wendy Alexander's ideas that seems to have fallen by the wayside?

In conclusion—I am really coming to a conclusion this time—while we debate reports and responses, we must remember the importance of the voluntary sector to all Scotland's communities, both urban and rural. Each has particular problems, as Mike Rumbles pointed out, such as isolation. It is all very well to talk about population numbers and the level of poverty in one place in comparison with another, but for the individual who lives in poverty, it does not matter how many more people live in poverty around them. We must carefully consider how we deal with the voluntary sector in rural areas, which have their own problems with infrastructure. For example, transport is a basic need, with which the geographic SIPs can help.

Overall, the voluntary sector provides services that are locally controlled and that focus more clearly on the needs of individual service users and volunteers. The sector is more responsive than remote, bureaucratic organisations and is an important source of community leadership.

I thank all the volunteers and workers from the voluntary sector who took time to correspond with and meet the Social Justice Committee. They contributed greatly to the development of the committee's thinking. I ask the new ministerial team to consider more fully how to respond to the Social Justice Committee's report and to commit the Executive to taking action more rapidly than it has done to date. The SNP supports the committee's motion, which says that we should note the report, but I ask the minister to take notice of the report.

10:03

Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh (Central Scotland) (Con): I put on record my congratulations to Margaret Curran on her promotion to the ministerial ranks. Unfortunately, she is not here to hear that for herself, but that is neither here nor there. Mr Henry has a hard act to follow. I also offer Iain Gray every good wish in his new portfolio as minister for everything.

We broadly welcome the findings of the Social Justice Committee report on its inquiry into the voluntary sector in Scotland. As a member of the committee, I was party to much of the evidence and the deliberations that surrounded our long-running inquiry. I am pleased that today sees the fruition of many months of hard work and that we have the opportunity to debate the important issues that the inquiry raised. There is no doubt that those who work in the voluntary sector, either as paid members of staff in charities or as volunteers in local communities, carry out sterling but often unrecognised work. Their commitment should be applauded—there is little doubt about the value that it adds.

The inquiry threw up certain concerns, which more than deserve to be aired. First, I will address the independence of the voluntary sector, which witnesses raised time and again during the evidence-taking sessions. Historically, the voluntary sector has been independent from government, and that independence is the sector's main strength. Voluntary organisations require independence to achieve their aims, meet local needs and provide a personalised service to their clients. My party and I find it wholly inappropriate that the voluntary sector should become an extended arm of government. As I have suggested, that concern is not held by the Scottish Conservative party alone. As long ago as 1998, Neil McIntosh, the convener of the SCVO, wrote in his annual review:

"Of course we need to be aware of the dangers of the loss of individual identity—what makes the voluntary sector special is its diversity and pluralism which do so much to enrich our society."

During the inquiry, the committee made numerous visits to see voluntary sector work in action on the ground in all parts of Scotland. Members particularly strove to visit rural areas, because we were well aware of the dominance of committee members from the central belt. Our visits were highly effective, because they allowed people to speak more freely about their concerns than they might have done in the more formal environment of an evidence-taking session.

I vividly recall our visit to Paisley, where feelings about the funding partners ran high, culminating in accusations of favouritism and corruption in the local authority. As a Lanarkshire lass, that was all quite alien to me. People's comments on independence included the allegation that groups were

"'led by the nose' by councils as they who pay the piper 'call the tune'. The attitude of councillors varies from co-operation to feeling threatened. As a result, services may be compromised."

Some observations were pretty damning. For example, it was said of the much-lauded compact that it is

"'invisible' in the Highlands and 'may as well not be there'."

The role of partnership was also questioned. Local authorities might seek the views of voluntary sector organisations but the people to whom we spoke did not feel that they were regarded as equal partners. Consultation exercises were often conducted on the local authority's terms—if they were conducted at all.

Charities felt that it was not always easy to obtain access to local authorities to discuss funding, and that funding was available for

"topics 'of interest to politicians'."

It was felt that council funding could stifle the motivation of volunteers and affect the ethos of volunteering. Charitable organisations also suffer from what I will call consultation fatigue. Organisations that are united under umbrella organisations are often asked by the Executive to take part in public consultation exercises, but not all charities have the resources or time to meet regularly to discuss the issues on which their opinion is sought. Some consultation exercises have time scales that are as short as six weeks. In many cases, such time scales are too short to allow organisations to respond. In smaller charities, front-line staff are taken away from their priorities to collate information. It is not that those charities have no opinion on the issues raised; quite simply, they have neither the time nor the resources to cope with the constant round of consultations. That is what I mean by consultation fatigue, which must surely be counted among the additional burdens and challenges that face the sector and that we are discussing today.

Generally, the feeling remains that it is difficult for voluntary sector organisations not to feel beholden to various bodies, because of the way in which they are funded. There is far too much regulation and bureaucracy and organisations feel that they have to jump through hoops to satisfy conditions before a grant is awarded.

Participants in the fact-finding visit that I attended in the Mid Scotland and Fife region spoke of the trade-off between the independence of an organisation—which allows it to make its own decisions and follow its own agenda—and the reality of contracting with funders to deliver shared priorities. The report makes for disturbing reading when it examines the evidence of such threats to the independence of the sector, as opposed to the independence to which Linda Fabiani referred. That theme can be extended to independent schools. We must fiercely guard the charitable status of schools and I am sure that my colleagues will discuss that issue in greater detail later.

The second issue that I will address is that of charitable street collections. I am sure that many members will be familiar with the teams of face-to-face fundraisers—or tabard collectors—who have become a familiar feature of the streets and main shopping areas of our towns and cities.

Although I appreciate that charities face a constant battle in their search for innovative mechanisms to raise funds, I and others share concerns about that style of fundraising. The teams of people collect on behalf of the larger, well-established charities. They are notable for saying, "Have you got a moment for Oxfam?" or, "Have you got a minute for Barnardos?" or for whatever charity they happen to be representing that day.

Many members of the public have been surprised to learn that the tabard collectors are not aligned to any charity and that they change their allegiance according to the week. They are also paid, which obliterates another preconception about those who collect for charity on the streets. They are not collecting money but asking people to give a small donation every month by direct debit or standing order.

As Jean McFadden stated to the Social Justice Committee in October last year:

"they are not regulated, and there is no limit to their numbers."—[Official Report, Social Justice Committee, 3 October 2001; c 2552.]

I was heartened by the fact that Mrs McFadden's report recommended that the new legislation should cover all types of cash and non-cash donations, and that people who are not volunteers should be identified as such. I am pleased that the issue has been highlighted and I hope that the recommendations of the McFadden inquiry that have been shelved will be taken on board in future.

I support the committee's recommendation that volunteering is to be encouraged in Scotland's communities, but that should not overshadow the fact that there are people who are suffering from volunteer fatigue. Those who become involved in voluntary activities are getting tired of the regulatory burdens that the Executive places on them and their organisations.

The Executive would have us believe that the voluntary sector's well-being is one of its priorities. but the Executive does not seem to be practising what it preaches. I am thinking of the eight care homes run by the Church of Scotland that face closure. The Church of Scotland does not run care homes to make money; it does so out of a selfless desire to care for others. Five homes have already closed and Dunselma in Fenwick is facing closure. That brings me back to my earlier point about the regulatory burdens that the Executive is introducing and which continue to stifle charities.

For older residents, the closure of all those homes will be traumatic and possibly damaging to their health. With the closure of Dunselma, the nearest care home will be in Patna in east Ayrshire, which is 45 minutes away. Dunselma is—or, I should say, was—a fine example of all that the Executive claims to hold dear. All kinds of volunteering and community involvement took place there—meals on wheels, a lunch club, a volunteer-run health club for the residents and it was a home away from home for many. Many members would agree that Dunselma was a fine example.

Gordon Brown's recent decision to increase national insurance contributions will serve only to add to the voluntary sector's burdens. It is estimated that it could cost the sector approximately £15 million. That is an example of how the Executive flatters to help the voluntary sector while causing damage to it.

Added to that is the fact that the removal of advance corporation tax credits has hit charity and voluntary organisations. That has cost £400 million this year across the UK and costs approximately £40 million a year in Scotland. A shocking 15 per cent of all public donations to charities goes directly to the Treasury in unrecoverable VAT. That equates to £46 million a year in Scotland.

Although a reserved issue, the effect of Labour's abuse of the national lottery has been profound—£3.7 billion has been taken from the lottery to pay for pet projects, including education, health and environmental programmes, which should be funded by taxation. The losers are charities, the arts, sports and heritage.

Robert Brown: Will the member take an intervention on that point?

The Presiding Officer: The member is in her last minute.

Mrs McIntosh: I am in my last minute; the member should have asked earlier.

I will end on a more positive note. Volunteers week is due to start in less than a month, on Friday 7 June. It will start with a parade from George Square to the Glasgow Royal Concert Hall. It is an opportunity for us to recognise and celebrate the work of volunteers as well as a chance for them to recruit new volunteers. No doubt other members and I will be recruited to do some work during that week. Last year, I found myself presenting certificates to volunteers and frying chips at a lunch club in Kilmarnock. That makes three generations of chip friers in my family—who would have thought it?

I conclude by sincerely thanking all the organisations and individuals that allowed us to visit their projects, those who came and met members of the Social Justice Committee, and those who gave written or oral evidence and who generally informed our deliberations. We were, of course, ably assisted by our clerking staff, one of whom has moved on to bigger and better things, and their shepherding was much appreciated.

No one could claim that our inquiry into the voluntary sector was an in-depth study, but we hope that we have provided a snapshot of the sector's condition and of the opinions of those most closely associated with it.

10:15

Robert Brown (Glasgow) (LD): I start by adding my congratulations to the new members of the ministerial team, particularly Margaret Curran, who will make an excellent Minister for Social Justice. My congratulations to Hugh Henry are tinged with slight commiseration about the fact that he will have to burn the midnight oil to conquer a new brief and get up to speed on some complex issues. Nevertheless, I congratulate him.

I begin with some observations on my colleagues' contributions. I will do so across the board, in order to be fair.

I was interested in Lyndsay McIntosh's tax-raising agenda. That was why I intervened in the later part of her speech. I was also interested in Linda Fabiani's comment about the way in which local organisations constantly innovate. That comment was significant and related to Johann Lamont's comment about the way in which voluntary organisations should contribute to the agenda. There is a subtle difference between contributing to the agenda and organisations having the right to have their own agenda within the diverse and overarching issues that face the voluntary sector.

Can we imagine a Scotland without a voluntary sector? There would be no citizens advice bureaux, no Shelter Scotland, no credit unions, no independent drug addiction projects, no Alcoholics Anonymous, no after-school clubs or parent teacher associations, no Burns clubs or football supporters clubs, no women's guilds and no scouts. It would be a Scotland without colour or heart. It would be a dysfunctional and poorer Scotland.

No one can define the voluntary sector. As Dr Nicholas Fife and Dr Christine Mulligan put it in their research report:

"Having 'a policy' for the voluntary sector is a bit like having 'a policy' for the private sector. The private sector contains Microsoft and self-employed window cleaners and you would never dream of putting them together"

any more than we could put together the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds and one of the smaller, locally funded service-providing organisations.

For all that, there are features that distinguish the voluntary sector from other sectors in society: it is robustly independent; its activities are for the public good; and it is diverse in organisation, style, size and function. There is a Darwinian, survival-of-the-fittest air about it. Many of us would not survive if its people were not made of sterner stuff than most of us are.

It was interesting for the Social Justice Committee to hear evidence in Edinburgh and throughout Scotland, from Inverness to Lockerbie. Hearing and seeing at first hand the problems faced by local groups does enormous good for the prestige and standing of the Scottish Parliament. I am grateful, as are other colleagues, to all the people who gave their time.

The support given by the Parliament and the Executive to capacity building in the sector has been worth while. An increase in funding from £23 million in 1998-99 to £39 million in 2001-02 has helped to build the network of councils for voluntary services and local volunteer development agencies or volunteer bureaux throughout Scotland. The Scottish compact, the active communities initiative, the millennium volunteers programme and the establishment of social investment Scotland are all playing their part.

The Scottish Executive says that it recognises the voluntary sector as

"a key partner in policy development, service delivery and the development of community capacity"

and recognises that

"voluntary sector organisations have their own agenda, priorities and actions" —[Official Report, Social Justice Committee, 19 September 2001; c 2501 and 2504.]

I would go a bit further and say that we live in a pluralist society in which the voluntary or independent sector has a democratic legitimacy that is as valid as, if different from, that of the Parliament or local authorities. At a time when democratic politics are being challenged as never before, the sector is arguably one of the healthiest manifestations of local democracy.

Against that background, why do we so often fail to sustain local voluntary groups and impose additional burdens on them or regulate them with targets and objectives that are often inappropriate and load them with unnecessary bureaucracy? During the inquiry, we were commonly told that 30 per cent or more of the time of voluntary groups' paid officials is spent scrabbling around for funds. I recently heard of one small organisation in Cambuslang, in my constituency, that is dependent on 13 different funding sources.

The Parliament has done fairly well in dealing with the additional financial burdens that legislation has imposed. We took on the cost of Scottish Criminal Record Office checks, we got round the problem of water rates for all but the largest organisations and the Executive is examining the cost of the regulation of houses in multiple occupation as it affects universities and Abbeyfield homes.

I will mention one new burden on which I seek the minister's assurance. Gordon Brown's budget this year will result in a rise in the national insurance burden on employers, including many voluntary organisations. I will pass over the fact that the problem was totally unnecessary and resulted from the Labour Government in London having to pretend that it was not raising income tax. If the Government had done the sensible thing and had funded the necessary investment in the national health service by an appropriate rise in income tax, for which the Liberal Democrats have argued for years, voluntary groups and small businesses would not have suffered the extra burden.

Christine Grahame (South of Scotland) (SNP): I am not sure how the budget change will impact on the money that local authorities are able to provide, as the national insurance increase will obviously affect their budgets. Perhaps the Executive should take into account the fact that less funding will be available to local authorities because of the new national insurance burden.

Robert Brown: Christine Grahame is absolutely right. The feed-through issue must be acknowledged. In answer to my question the other day, the Executive said that voluntary organisations will be helped by a range of budget measures, such as tax relief for gifts of land and buildings to charities and changes to the rules for gift aid. Frankly, such measures are not especially relevant to most of the social sector voluntary groups to which the present debate relates.

It is necessary for the Executive to ensure that local authorities are funded and it is necessary for local authorities to ensure that the voluntary sector is funded to deal with the increase in costs. An organisation with two or three staff that operates on a local authority grant—in many cases such grants will have been fixed for five or six years—cannot absorb the extra cost without experiencing damage to its service. The Executive and the UK Government must give proper consideration to such matters before they put extra burdens on voluntary groups.

I will make a specific point about citizens advice bureaux, in which I have been involved over the years. CABx are perhaps uniquely affected by the activities of the Parliament. Twenty-three of the 40 acts that have been passed by the Parliament since 1999 have an impact on the service provided by CABx, which put a huge and vital emphasis on debt advice and debt management. The Debt Arrangement and Attachment (Scotland) Bill, which was introduced earlier this week, will have an even greater effect on their service.

Seventy-seven per cent of all Department for Work and Pensions forms refer specifically to the CABx, as does the Mortgage Rights (Scotland) Act 2001. The Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 also requires a major increase in housing advice from the CABx. My point is simple: anyone can see that the CABx are a special case and require adequate and increased funding. One can argue that local authorities should have a statutory duty adequately to fund independent advice services. The new burdens must be matched by proper resources, however that is done. CABx cannot provide their service on standstill budgets and can certainly not do so in the light of the cuts, of 40 per cent cut in Edinburgh for example, that they have experienced in recent years.

Mr Raffan: The CABx play a central role. Does the member agree that it is vital to increase their coverage in Scotland? They are not present or active in parts of Scotland where they are badly needed.

Robert Brown: Absolutely. On the Social Justice Committee's visit to Stonehaven, Cathie Craigie and I went to a former part-time CAB that had had to be cast adrift from the CAB organisation because it could not meet the service standards, premises arrangements and so on that were in place. We must find ways to deal properly with rurality, which Mike Rumbles mentioned.

All members have agreed that funding is the "biggy", as Linda Fabiani put it. Funding must be addressed at a local level, because often too little attention is paid to core funding. There is a case for an independent Scottish voluntary sector development fund, which—rather like the Department of Trade and Industry funding for Citizens Advice Scotland—would give muscle to local organisations in encouraging three-year partnership agreements with councils.

The Scottish Executive is right to say that councils are now being funded on a three-year basis and that there is no reason why councils in turn should not fund the voluntary sector organisations that they support on a three-year basis—not on a two-year basis, as Glasgow City Council is beginning to develop, or on the basis of a policy of no arrangements at all, which many councils adopt. Many councils' performance on funding agreements is quite lamentable—three-year agreements are as common as sightings of the yeti.

We must examine the contract culture, because what is appropriate for some organisations that deal with the public sector—as regards targets for delivery, for example—is not particularly appropriate for the voluntary sector, which provides services in a different way. The voluntary sector's services have an additional dynamic, human element, which it is not always possible to measure in the way that Governments and civil servants desire.

There must also be a more even playing field with regard to the way in which local authorities approach the provision of services by voluntary sector providers and council departments. In many instances, voluntary sector provision can sometimes do a better job than local authority services can. That must be acknowledged and the voluntary sector must be dealt with evenly.

A change in philosophy is necessary. There must be a move away from constant innovation and reinvention of the wheel towards sustaining successful organisations. The idea that most organisations can become self-sufficient at the end of a three-year or a five-year period is a chimera and, as such, is a public policy tool that should be bucketed. In private business, a track record is highly desirable when one goes to see the bank manager. In the voluntary sector, a track record represents a handicap.

I do not have time to discuss the rural issue, but all members benefited from the meetings that the committee had with various rural groups across Scotland.

I will finish by returning to the extra contribution of the voluntary sector. I recently visited the Castlemilk Economic Development Agency and a project that is called Can Cycle, which was the brainchild of a man with a vision. The project repairs bikes for the local youngsters at no cost, renovates bikes for sale at a cost of less than £30 and provides youngsters with training in maintenance skills. A related tin-can recycling scheme helps to fund the project. It takes many swallows to make a summer and the Can Cycle project by itself does not magically solve the problems of poverty or family breakdown in Castlemilk. However, many youngsters who are enjoying the freedom of their bikes rather than annoying the neighbours are less frustrated and bored than they might have been without the project.

Along with the other 44,000 voluntary sector organisations across Scotland, the Can Cycle project gives life, hope and a sense of the future to many disadvantaged communities and people in our country. In backing the Social Justice Committee's report, let us make sure that the most dynamic part of our civic society is helped and encouraged by the actions of government, both local and national.

I support the committee's report.

The Presiding Officer: I thank the convener of the Social Justice Committee and all members who have spoken, because we have finished the opening speeches ahead of time, which must be a record. We now come to the open debate.

10:27

Karen Whitefield (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab): I add my congratulations to Hugh Henry on his appointment as the Deputy Minister for Social Justice. I know that all members of the Social Justice Committee will look forward to working with him.

I thank everyone who contributed to the Social Justice Committee's report on the voluntary sector in Scotland. In particular, I thank the committee clerks for their effort in assisting to produce a substantial and refreshingly direct report. I also thank all the voluntary and community organisations that participated in our inquiry. We heard the views and concerns of an incredibly wide range of voluntary groups, from Lockerbie to Orkney.

It is perhaps not surprising that, on many issues, those groups spoke with one voice. Funding, voluntary sector independence, the rural dimension, infrastructure and relationships with local and national government became the central themes for each of our visits. The fact that so many organisations were able to participate in the process is further proof, if proof were needed, that our Parliament is delivering the kind of responsive, devolved government that those who shaped the Scotland Act 1998 envisaged.

During our inquiry, I valued having the opportunity to meet representatives of voluntary organisations from the Highlands and the Edinburgh and Lothian areas. I found their experience and first-hand knowledge helpful and I was impressed by the knowledge and commitment of all those who gave evidence. Scotland has a thriving and dynamic voluntary sector, of which we should rightly be proud, but which we should never take for granted.

During our visit to Inverness, the particular difficulties that the voluntary sector faces in rural communities were raised. Those included difficulties with transport, volunteer recruitment and communication. Indeed, the method of taking evidence from groups in Orkney—videoconferencing—provided a glimpse of the opportunities that information technology could offer to help to address some of those problems in future.

Groups in Inverness raised a number of concerns about funding. They highlighted the need to ensure that funders take account of the cost of training and of making funding applications. I am pleased that the Social Justice Committee's report has highlighted that point; I hope that the Executive will take it on board. I note that, in its response, the Executive indicated its belief in the value of staff and volunteer training.

The evidence that Linda Fabiani and I took from groups in Edinburgh and the Lothians highlighted other concerns about funding. Particular concerns were raised about the financial impact of increased regulation on voluntary organisations; the need for longer-term, three-year to five-year funding to allow more strategic planning; and the need to move away from the obsession with innovation. As other members have pointed out, we do not always have to reinvent the wheel. Many projects and organisations out there have proved themselves during their initial funding period. They deserve to become mainstream services.

I am pleased to see that, in its response to the Social Justice Committee's report, the Scottish Executive has given a commitment, in its direct funding of the voluntary sector, to provide on-going financial support in three-year tranches. I am also pleased that, in the most recent letter from the New Opportunities Fund to the committee, David Campbell has stated that the NOF is already implementing longer-term funding of three to five years.

The SCVO's briefing for today's debate commends the committee's long-running and detailed inquiry. However, our detailed inquiry manages only to scratch at the surface of the voluntary sector in Scotland. Our report marks the end of our inquiry but the beginning of a process of creating an environment in which voluntary and community organisations can flourish.

I commend and support the report.

10:32

Tricia Marwick (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP): I welcome the report from the Social Justice Committee. It should come as no great surprise to anybody that my remarks will focus on the independence of the voluntary sector—a subject that I pursued before this Parliament was set up and that I have continued to pursue during various debates in the chamber.

The Social Justice Committee's report says that some organisations expressed concern about their ability fully to maintain their independence from their funding organisations. That is a very serious problem indeed.

The Third Age Group affair in Fife received much publicity and rightly so. It is the tip of a very large iceberg and the template for the worst kind of control—

Helen Eadie (Dunfermline East) (Lab): Will the member give way?

Tricia Marwick: Certainly.

Helen Eadie: Does the member accept that last week's Audit Scotland report gave unequivocal clearance to Fife Council?

Tricia Marwick: Helen Eadie should read the report for herself rather than believe the spin from the leader of the administration in Fife. The report is quite clear. It speaks of "wholly irregular" practices, "serious concerns" and "wholly inappropriate" actions by Fife Council employees.

The Third Age Group never actually existed as a voluntary organisation. Yes, it was an official charity, recognised by the Scottish Charities Office; yes, it had a management committee; but it was no more than a sham organisation—a front for Fife social work. As Douglas Sinclair, the chief executive of Fife Council said in his second report:

"It was council made. Over the life of the project the dominant roles in the management were played by employees of Fife Council rather than by the volunteer members of the management committee."

Every significant person who was associated with the Third Age Group centre was a member of the Labour party. Angela McCallum, the first employee, was employed after she became a Labour councillor. Lynda Struthers, the second employee, was a Labour activist and Henry McLeish's election agent. Maureen Rodger, a social worker, was the driving force throughout the life of the centre, and was a Labour party election agent.

Cathie Craigie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab): Is Tricia Marwick suggesting that being a member of the Labour party should bar a person from taking part in any voluntary organisation or group? It has been the history of Labour party members to be involved in volunteering. In fact, up and down the country, members will find that the majority of people who are out there volunteering—certainly in the areas with which I am familiar—are all very much Labour party supporters. Tricia Marwick seems to suggest that Labour party people should not be involved in voluntary organisations. That is ludicrous.

Tricia Marwick: Cathie Craigie well knows that that is not what I am saying.

Cathie Craigie: Well, it very much sounds like it.

Tricia Marwick: The member well knows that that is not what I am saying. What I am doing is ensuring that the links between the Labour party and a sham organisation are well known to this chamber.

I will continue. Mary Cairns and Frances Howatson, who are social workers—

Karen Whitefield: On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Would it be possible for you to comment on the appropriateness of Tricia Marwick's comments? The report that we are discussing is on the voluntary sector in Scotland. Our committee spent a considerable amount of time on the report and I would be grateful if members who participate in the debate would speak to the report.

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Mr George Reid): The advice that I have been given is that Ms Marwick is in order at present. However, I am uneasy about the direction that the debate is taking. I wonder whether Ms Marwick would bear that in mind.

Tricia Marwick: Thank you, Presiding Officer. I draw your attention to my first remarks on the independence of the voluntary sector, a subject that was highlighted in the Social Justice Committee's report.

Mr Sinclair, the chief executive, quaintly referred to those links as "crossovers". The rest of us see the affair for what it is—good old-fashioned cronyism. Social workers purported to be office bearers, after the organisation wound up, to allow access to funds; documents were shredded by Fife social workers; and the remaining funds were transferred to another organisation by Fife social workers.

There have been a number of inquiries. There was a whitewash in December when Douglas Sinclair claimed that the council's actions with regard to the Third Age Group centre were "above reproach". After some dragging, kicking and screaming, a more detailed report was produced. Audit Scotland had, at my request, investigated the matter and provided an independent report—

Kate Maclean (Dundee West) (Lab): On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Would you rule on whether the member is actually talking to this report or talking to a specific situation in Fife? I would suggest that she is talking to a specific situation in Fife.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: As I say, I have been advised that the member is in order—just. However, I have expressed my unease about the direction that the debate is taking. I wonder, yet again, whether Ms Marwick will bear that in mind.

Cathie Craigie: On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Will you share the advice that you have received and tell us why the member is "just" in order?

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The chair will not comment on that. I have given my ruling and that is all that I intend to say.

Tricia Marwick: There are continuing police inquiries into the matter. One organisation that has not been involved is the Scottish Charities Office—despite having the power to be so. The silence has been deafening from the Scottish Charities Office. I have now formally asked the Scottish Charities Office to investigate the matter.

Charity law reform in Scotland is long overdue. The SCVO was led to believe that such reform would come in the first session of this Parliament, but a reply to me this week from the Deputy Minister for Justice has finally ruled that out. The Third Age Group affair has shone a light on the practices in Fife but no one is naive enough to believe that such practices do not exist elsewhere. The voluntary sector is vital to the well-being of our community life in Scotland. It is important to the sector and to us that the sector has proper regulation, proper monitoring—and independence.

10:39

Helen Eadie (Dunfermline East) (Lab): I congratulate the Social Justice Committee and I congratulate the new Minister for Social Justice and the new Deputy Minister for Social Justice on their appointments.

The committee's report tells us that there is an innate goodness and an innate wish in our society to help and to give. I wish I could say the same about Tricia Marwick after the damage that she has done to the voluntary sector in Fife.

I believe that we can celebrate the contribution of the voluntary sector throughout Scotland. I believe that the voluntary sector must play an equal part in developing strategy for volunteering in Scotland. We all know of, and are involved in, many voluntary organisations in our constituencies. Like others, I have been involved as a volunteer and as a full-time worker. Among the people who set real examples are those in their 80s who talk about helping "old people" who are about 10 years younger than they are. In my area it is a common for people in their 70s and 80s to want to continue to give their time.

As a Parliament we have a duty to promote and encourage greater voluntary and community involvement. We have a duty to raise awareness and inspire more people to get involved, increase opportunities for volunteering, make it easier for people to get involved and to support the development of active community up and down the country. That should not be seen as the Executive getting people to do something for nothing—that would not be an appropriate basis for Government involvement in the voluntary sector.

The report states clearly that involvement in the voluntary sector is about supporting and encouraging folk to contribute to their communities, to have a voice in the services that they receive and often help to deliver and to feel that they are integral part of the society in which they live. It is all about empowering and engaging people and combating social exclusion. Volunteering can enrich volunteers' lives. I welcome the report's ideas about further codifying relations between local and central Government and voluntary organisations in a readily comprehensible fashion.

The Scottish voluntary sector has an annual income in excess of £2 billion, which is equivalent to 5 per cent of gross domestic product. It employs more than 40,000 people who are involved in more than 50,000 forms of voluntary management. The charitable sector is a significant player in the economy of Britain. The sector is worth about £16 billion a year. It directly employs almost 250,000 people and is larger than the United Kingdom motor industry.

The Government spends about £104 million a year in the voluntary sector, local authorities add an extra £150 million and the national lottery adds £145 million. That is a significant sum and underlines the growing appreciation of what the voluntary sector can contribute, in partnership with the Government, to the life of the country. One only has to look at the voluntary movement in housing to realise what a singularly important task is taken forward, by and large, by a great deal of voluntary activity. The fact that so much public money is invested in that sector underlines the importance that we attach to the voluntary sector.

The report calls for mainstreaming. I urge the minister to go further. The process of proofing is important and all ministers in the Scottish Executive should be urged to remember that when devising their policies. If the minister's support for voluntary activity is to find a real place in the realms of Government, the Scottish Executive must develop—even more than it has already—an appreciation and understanding of the effect that its policies have on the voluntary sector. If proofing guidelines have not already been issued to all departments, I urge ministers to take that in hand. I ask the minister to remind colleagues to take into account that dimension of our public life when other departments are framing policies or legislation. That continual awareness can make a great difference in ensuring that the voluntary sector finds its place in partnership with Government in many vital areas.

I urge the minister to bear in mind the concerns that faith-based organisations have expressed about bidding for funds. Such organisations feel that whenever they deal with the Government or local authorities, they are forced to choose between being true to their religious integrity and complying with the policy of the local authority or Government department. Will the minister do everything in his power to simplify the funding arrangements, bureaucracy and form filling with which voluntary organisations have to deal?

I support the report and all the work of the Social Justice Committee. I was impressed with the work of members and clerks—it was a very full report.

10:43

Mr Brian Monteith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con): I welcome the report, particularly because it gives us an opportunity to debate several important issues. I think that it was quite appropriate for Tricia Marwick to bring up the Third Age Group charity. Even if her points were unpalatable for some, it is clear that the debate provided an opportunity to raise such pertinent questions.

The pertinent questions that I would like to raise relate to funding and, in particular, to lottery support for voluntary organisations. Members will be aware of the New Opportunities Fund—in particular because the New Opportunities Fund was kind enough to write to us and tell us what a grand job it is doing. Indeed it also sent us the briefing that Mr Gibson is adeptly waving around.

I will quote from the letter:

"The New Opportunities Fund is the newest Lottery distributor, having been established in 1998 to make grants to health, education and environment projects, with a particular focus on promoting social inclusion. Our mission is to help create lasting improvement to the quality of life, particularly of disadvantaged communities in both urban and rural areas."

Amen to that. It sounds like a terrific and laudable aim.

However, the New Opportunities Fund is somewhat concerned about the report. It says:

"There appears to be an inference in the report ... that our funding is not accessible to the voluntary sector."

The NOF refers to paragraph 27 in particular. I would like to go further than the report and not infer but state that there is a problem with lottery funding for voluntary organisations.

I would like to draw members' attention to the cause of Scottish Centres. Scottish Centres provides facilities where school children can be given intensive outdoor education. In partnership with local authority, child care and social work services, Scottish Centres provides specialist courses for young people with serious behavioural problems, including many who have already engaged in criminal activity. It is the largest provider of such services.

In order to improve its services, Scottish Centres wanted to access lottery funding through the New Opportunities Fund. However, the difficulty for an organisation such as Scottish Centres is that, because it is national, it has to apply for funding through local authorities. The funding from the New Opportunities Fund has been disbursed and devolved to the 32 local authorities. The four centres across Scotland run by Scottish Centres are not able to apply to one fund—Scottish Centres must apply to the 32 local authorities that use its facilities. I am sure that members will appreciate the difficulties and the burden that places on the organisation.

I call on the New Opportunities Fund to recognise that while devolving grant disbursement is a laudable aim, it is inappropriate for an organisation that operates on a national level to have to go through 32 local authorities to put together a bid for a centre in Meigle in Perthshire that services children in great need from Edinburgh, Glasgow and Dumfries. Local authorities in those areas will not be easily persuaded to award money to centres that are outwith their boundaries.

I suggest that the New Opportunities Fund puts aside a set amount for national projects. If we are to deliver social inclusion across the nation rather than just locally, Scottish Centres must be able to access such funds to ensure that it can deliver the voluntary service that would otherwise cost the public purse a great deal more.

10:48

Cathy Peattie (Falkirk East) (Lab): As many members will know, I have a background in the voluntary sector and I remain involved in several organisations that are listed in the register of members' interests. The voluntary sector plays an important role in our communities. The sector has evolved and expanded and is now an integral part of many aspects of modern life, often providing services, support and solidarity where the public sector cannot.

The areas in which the voluntary sector is engaged have also changed. Although the sector is still delivering meals on wheels and hospital trolleys, it is also involved in giving advice, care of the elderly, child care, youth work, education, adult learning, social economy—things like credit unions—housing, arts, community action organisations, such as those fighting drug abuse, and so on. The voluntary sector has changed substantially over the past 20 years. Voluntary and statutory bodies are able to work together in ways that complement each other's strengths.

The major issue for the voluntary sector has always been the struggle for sustainable funding and resources. Many funders offer short-term funding for new ideas and projects. That is important, but we need to look beyond seedcorn funding for voluntary organisations to core funding that provides resources for running costs, training, consolidation and strategic planning. Many people in voluntary organisations become skilled at reinventing their organisations to meet the latest criteria. Often, funding becomes the main focus in organisations. That is a diversion of time and effort from the primary objectives of organisations.

Matched funding can also be a nightmare, in particular when it is paid in arrears, and it is even more of a nightmare when it is paid late, as is often the case. We need to recognise that if a project is good and meets continued need, it should not be forced to close simply because a funding stream has dried up. In my experience, the voluntary sector is the only sector in which staff fundraise—whether through jumble sales or by filling in endless application forms—for their own salaries. That is not appropriate.

In recent years, the relationship between Government and the voluntary sector in Scotland has improved, but I look forward to continued improvement. Many voluntary organisations work closely with local authorities, and trust and mutual respect can develop. That can be positive, but not all voluntary organisations share that experience. There needs to be a compact at local level that is based on a national model but tailored to local needs.

A lot remains to be done in the development of voluntary sector infrastructure at a local level, in particular with disadvantaged groups. For example, the Equal Opportunities Committee heard from the black and ethnic minority communities, which stressed the need to develop voluntary sector infrastructure at a local level. Much work has still to be done on voluntary sector issues. Local councils for voluntary services can play a key role in that essential development by working with local groups to facilitate participation and the active citizenship of people in their communities.

I welcome the report, and commend the Social Justice Committee on it. I look forward to continued work and debate in the Scottish Parliament on the voluntary sector.

10:51

Mr Mike Rumbles (West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine) (LD): Like many other contributors to the debate, I welcome the report and its many positive recommendations. However, I wish to address a rather dangerous trend in the way in which the Social Justice Committee and the Executive identify the ways in which social inclusion and poverty in Scotland can be tackled.

The Social Justice Committee's report states on page 13:

"The Committee encourages the Executive to increase targeting of volunteering initiatives in deprived communities. However, this must be accompanied by support to meet the additional burdens present in such areas, such as transport costs."

I want to challenge an attitude of mind. I well understand the wishes of the authors of the report to tackle poverty and social exclusion in what they see as obvious and well-defined communities, especially those in the constituencies that they know well. The members of the Social Justice Committee represent constituencies in Glasgow, Cumbernauld, Airdrie and the Central Scotland region, but—from a geographical perspective—it is not what one might call a representative committee drawn from the whole of Scotland.

Mr Kenneth Gibson (Glasgow) (SNP): Does Mr Rumbles accept that members of the committee visited every region of Scotland including, of course, his own?

Mr Rumbles: Absolutely. I know that two members of the Social Justice Committee visited my constituency, but I would have liked to know about their visit beforehand.

There are many parts of Scotland where deprivation is not so easily identifiable, and where the less well-off in society do not live in so-called deprived communities. For example, in my constituency of West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine, 15 per cent of my constituents live in poverty, and they do so among some of the most well-off in our society. If it is assumed that deprived communities must be targeted, by definition those who are most in need of help—those who live not only in poverty but in isolation from the rest of the community, which is perceived to be relatively well-off—will be failed. I get more than a little fed up when, time after time, funding is targeted in that way.

Recently, I examined the funding announcements of the Community Fund, which Linda Fabiani highlighted. The fund has a remit to tackle social exclusion. We heard about the New Opportunities Fund as well. The figures that I have show that last year, Aberdeenshire received more than £0.5 million less than its fair share of Community Fund awards. Despite there being 14 applications, only six were successful. The average grant in Aberdeenshire of £100,000 was also well below the Scottish average of nearly £150,000.

Johann Lamont: Will the member give way?

Mr Raffan: Will the member give way?

Mr Rumbles: I will not. I have only a minute and a half left.

Mr Raffan: This is supposed to be a debate.

Mr Rumbles: Exactly, but there is no debate about this. Despite having nearly 5 per cent of Scotland's population, Aberdeenshire received just over 2.5 per cent of the main and medium sized grants.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I will tempt you with an extra minute, Mr Rumbles.

Johann Lamont: Will the member give way?

Mr Raffan: Will the member give way?

Mr Rumbles: I will give way to the convener of the Social Justice Committee.

Johann Lamont: I trust that Mr Rumbles will agree with me that he is making a false distinction. The report specifically addresses rurality. I ask him to reflect on the fact that all the evidence shows that because poor communities do not have the infrastructure and expertise to support applications, they are doing extremely badly in relation to lottery funding success.

Mr Rumbles: I am addressing another issue, which is exclusion in rural areas and which I see for myself. Aberdeenshire has been excluded, ironically, from the Community Fund's fair share initiative, because there are no defined deprived communities there.

By targeting communities, effectively we ignore the excluded in areas such as the area that I represent. To be fair to the Social Justice Committee, three paragraphs of its report identify the problem of rurality, which Johann Lamont mentioned, but that is only three paragraphs. The Social Justice Committee makes two recommendations on page 17 of the report. While the report asks the Executive to explore alternative ways of providing services in rural Scotland, I am disappointed that it does not recommend to the Executive specific ways of providing services differently. If I had time, I could go into that.

Cathie Craigie: Will the member give way?

Mr Rumbles: I would love to give way, if I have more than a minute left.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I will give you another minute, Mr Rumbles. There is time.

Cathie Craigie: I hope that you are not showing favouritism, Presiding Officer.

Mr Rumbles might be correct that the report devotes only three paragraphs to rural issues, but I am sure that he agrees—if he has read the report—that the issues that were raised, whether in the Borders or Lanarkshire, were broadly similar. For example, the transport and access issues that were raised were similar throughout the country.

Mr Rumbles: That is exactly my point. Rural areas are ignored if recognised deprived communities are targeted, because many people do not live in the targeted deprived communities.

I am sorry to say that this report is a missed opportunity for the less well-off in my constituency, and does not adequately address how to tackle social inclusion in isolated parts of rural Scotland. Put simply, we must avoid the easy option of only tackling poverty in clearly identified deprived communities. We must not forget that we need to be people orientated, and that we must tackle poverty where and when it occurs in every location, urban and rural. That means not forgetting those who need help most—those who are isolated and excluded from communities.

10:57

Christine Grahame (South of Scotland) (SNP): Do I have five minutes or four minutes, Presiding Officer?

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Let us see how we do.

Christine Grahame: I see. There are rules for some and rules for others.

First, I associate myself with Robert Brown's remarks on the role of citizens advice bureaux. When I was a practising lawyer, I spent much of my time recommending that clients go to the local citizens advice bureau, in particular for benefits information. Citizens advice bureaux need financial support.

Secondly, on rurality, I note the recommendations of the Social Justice Committee. I draw the Deputy Minister for Social Justice's attention to the first recommendation on page 17 of the report:

"The Scottish Executive should clarify how the problem of rurality is dealt with in funding arrangements for the Voluntary Sector."

I would like to know when an answer is received on that. I hope that it will deal with some of the issues that Mr Rumbles raised about defining deprived and impoverished areas.

I will focus on something that mystifies me, but for which there may be a simple answer, and that is how funding is allocated. I will provide an example with regard to the recently announced £5 million package for special educational needs. I note that grants will be given

"to a range of national and local organisations across Scotland, including Enquire, the national SEN advice and information service."

That is worthy, but I do not understand how a voluntary organisation such as ISEA Scotland—ISEA stands for Independent Special Education Advice—which is a Scotland-wide organisation, does not get any money. I make the distinction for this reason: ISEA Scotland does the hands-on work. Phone calls go to Enquire, but ISEA Scotland does the work. In fact, Enquire sends out a leaflet with information on ISEA Scotland on the back of it.

The organisation has 1,056 live cases. The two women who run ISEA have children with special educational needs—

Mr Adam Ingram (South of Scotland) (SNP): The situation that Christine Grahame describes is not confined to the Borders. Recently, I made a visit to Facilitate (Scotland), which is a suicide prevention centre in Glasgow that provides counselling services. I discovered that, because Facilitate was not going to receive the funding from the Greater Glasgow NHS Board and the Executive that it had anticipated, it was to lay off people. That was despite the fact that the Executive helpline Breathing Space, which opened a couple of weeks prior to my visit, was referring people to Facilitate. Such incoherence in funding has to be addressed by the minister.

Christine Grahame: That point is similar to the one that I was making, which was not meant to be contentious. I do not understand why an organisation that represents people at educational appeal tribunals and committee hearings does not get funding. ISEA is to receive temporary funding only until the end of the year and it states in its leaflet that, because of funding, its advocacy service is

"restricted to providing support to parents who are about to embark on or are in the process of going through an appeal or taking legal action. However exceptions will be made depending on individual circumstances".

It is all very well to create an advice line, but if the people who are delivering the advice are not getting funded—

Cathie Craigie: I do not wish to be personal, but on a number of occasions in the chamber, Christine Grahame has advocated the case of different voluntary sector groups. Surely strategic decisions have to be taken about whether a group is providing the right service for its area. Perhaps other more established groups are providing the same service.

Christine Grahame: ISEA is not a Borders-based service—its advice line covers the whole of Scotland. I made the point to give an example and members have heard another example from my colleague Adam Ingram. I may be wrong, but I think that ISEA is the only voluntary organisation in Scotland that is doing that work. I am asking the Social Justice Committee to consider that discrepancy.

I also ask the committee to be good enough to proceed to undertake an audit of the organisations that are receiving funding through the Scottish Executive or other bodies. That would allow us to see who is getting the money and what they do for that money. It may be that there are examples other that ISEA in Scotland, but I ask the committee to consider the position of ISEA. It is all very well to have advice lines, but not if the front-line voluntary organisations that provide them do not get support to deliver the services.

11:03

Cathie Craigie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab): I congratulate Hugh Henry on his move to the post of Deputy Minister for Social Justice. I hope that between now and the end of the debate Margaret Curran returns from being sworn in as the new Minister for Social Justice. I offer her my congratulations.

Like other members who have spoken in the debate, I welcome the opportunity to debate the Social Justice Committee's findings and recommendations, which resulted from our inquiry into the voluntary sector. I thank the committee clerks, past and present, for their efforts. I thank especially the voluntary sector groups from all parts of Scotland who gave of their precious time to make our visits meaningful and informative. I give special mention to the Stonehaven Advice and Information Resource—STAIR—project for the welcome that it gave Robert Brown and me, and for sharing with us its scarce resources—annual general meeting biscuits—on the day of our visit.

Every committee member was impressed with the quality of the evidence that the inquiry received. Volunteers and full-time workers up and down the country voiced similar experiences, whether they were working in communities in Aberdeen, in Perth or in the Borders. People took different approaches and had different ideas about improvements that they wanted to see in urban and rural areas. However, their opinions on, and suggestions for, improved relations with the Executive and for delivery and management of their services were basically the same.

Scotland's third sector has a key role to play in helping to deliver social justice. Voluntary and community groups are in close touch with marginalised groups. They are pleased to identify and to respond to changing needs. Every day, volunteers make a tremendous contribution to the lives of many people throughout Scotland. Indeed, many people who make such contributions do not consider themselves to be volunteers; they see themselves as people who are active in their communities and who simply help their neighbours.

As members have said, the committee met organisations from the eight regions of Scotland. The consensus that was reached as a result of evidence was that relations between the voluntary sector and the Executive had improved greatly since devolution. An important tool in those improved relations was the introduction of the "Scottish Compact". To the credit of all, the compact was prepared in a partnership between the Executive and the voluntary sector. The enthusiasm and drive behind the compact was because of Labour in the Executive. The Executive has given the voluntary sector a place at the policy development table, which will make policies more responsive to the sector's needs and potential. Robert Brown listed the many areas of service delivery. I will therefore not repeat the list.

Lyndsay McIntosh and Johann Lamont spoke about consultation. They also spoke about the concerns that were expressed up and down the country about the time that is involved in consultation and the work that it generates for staff and their volunteers. We heard that the time scales for consultations meant that full-time staff could not consult their members. Every committee member took that evidence seriously; we are concerned about it. The voluntary sector did not express those concerns by way of complaint; rather, it wanted to highlight the need for the Executive to review and examine ways of improving the methods that are used to consult and the time scales that are allowed for responses.

Mrs McIntosh: Does the member agree that difficulties arise when volunteers become involved in other voluntary groups? Does she agree that they can end up further and further away from the group with which they got involved in the first place? There are many ways of networking and volunteers are becoming fatigued as a result.

Cathie Craigie: That concern was expressed. From my experience, that is a problem for people in management positions. The Executive should not find the problems with consultation to be insurmountable. I hope that we can arrive at a better method of consulting and involving the sector.

The compact is a great step forward. I hope that we continue to encourage local government to prepare local compacts in consultation with the voluntary sector in their areas. The sector is developing. It employs about 100,000 people and involves hundreds of thousands of volunteers. The Executive has shown commitment. I hope that it continues to do so and to work at the same speed to improve the situation for the voluntary sector in future.

11:08

Donald Gorrie (Central Scotland) (LD): The report is interesting. I congratulate the people behind it who have worked hard on it. While I was a member of the Finance Committee, along with Adam Ingram, I produced a report on behalf of the committee that looked at funding of voluntary organisations. Various members have spoken about that subject, but it might be helpful for me to recapitulate some of the points that were made to me by voluntary organisations.

I will start with a political point. Successive Governments, including the present Executive, have grossly underfunded the voluntary sector. That is an absolute disgrace. Funding for the voluntary sector must be managed much better than it is. That is such a disgrace not because of the wickedness of politicians, but because many central and local government officials regard the voluntary sector as a competitor and possibly even as an enemy. Officials do not like the fact that the voluntary sector is uncontrollable. We politicians who believe in the voluntary sector must crack that open. I hope that the new ministers—whom I welcome—get a grip on the subject. If voluntary organisations do not receive adequate national and local funds, many will collapse.

As other members pointed out, sustainable core funding is especially needed. The current project-funding mania is extraordinarily foolish and means that people cannot secure continuing core funding for their basic activities. The local government changes in 1995 in particular harmed many groups that were usually funded locally. However, the same problem is evident at national level. For example, in 1986—under the wicked Tories—50 per cent of Youth Scotland's turnover was covered by grant; now however, under an enlightened coalition Government, it receives only 16 per cent. That is just not acceptable.

We must also maintain successful projects. With short-term funding, a project spends a year getting itself organised does something for the next year and then spends the third year scrabbling about for funds to keep things going. That is a ludicrous waste of everyone's time, money and energy.

We must combat the idea that "new is good"; actually, "new is good" is bad. Although many people are doing many things well, they do not receive support for keeping them up. Instead, they receive support for fanciful new projects and must compete in ludicrous competitions. In certain cases, they are not even allowed to use existing staff who know about the subject. As far as I can see, the Scottish Arts Council and Scottish Natural Heritage give out no core funding whatever. Although SNH is allocated £40 million, it passes only £2 million on to voluntary organisations.

I want to highlight a number of examples. The Lochaber Music School, which came to me for help with core funding, receives no such funding from the SAC. However, it does receive project funding. If it suggested teaching the clarsach and fiddle on top of Ben Nevis, it would secure funding for such an imaginative project. However, it gets nothing if it simply carries on teaching those instruments in Lochaber High School. The whole project is in dire straits. Furthermore, Rural Forum Scotland received project funding worth £2 million; however, because it could not secure £120,000 in core funding, it collapsed. We must address the issues of core funding and of keeping successful projects going.

The Executive and other people are keen on sport. However, although national sports bodies receive standstill grants, many local clubs receive no grant at all, despite often having budgets of less than £1,000. We are not talking about big money, but about reasonable amounts of money being sent in the right direction. Because of publicity, sport has particular problems with getting coaches, officials, referees and so on.

I want to touch on one or two other issues. Although I bore people endlessly with this issue, I will point out that there is excessive paperwork in the voluntary sector. There are too many unrelated initiatives from well-meaning Government departments. Moreover, staff conditions in the voluntary sector must be as good as they are in local government. Finally, committees need professional support from lawyers and other personnel, because they can often be tripped up on various issues.

Although the quantity of support in the chamber this morning is disappointing, we have heard some good speeches. I hope that the ministers will get a grip on the subject, and that we can get a grip on them.

11:14

Murdo Fraser (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con): For a moment, I thought that Donald Gorrie was about to cross the aisle and join the Conservatives. However, that will clearly have to wait for another day.

I welcome the Social Justice Committee's report. I am sure that all members are familiar with the vital role that voluntary groups play in their areas. Groups that I have come into contact with recently include: the Perthshire Association for Mental Health; the Samaritans' hospital car system, which provides elderly and ill people and their carers with transport to hospital; the Princess Royal Trust for Carers in Blairgowrie, which provides day care for those who suffer from Alzheimer's to ensure that their carers can have a much-needed break; and the young folk from Kirriemuir and Forfar who, with the support of their communities, are actively raising funds for a skateboard park. If we look at any local paper on any typical day, we will find many stories about what the voluntary sector is doing.

In echoing something that Donald Gorrie highlighted in his speech, I want first to mention the situation that faces Youth Scotland, which is the umbrella group for Scotland's youth clubs and whose representatives I met last Friday. Six hundred and nineteen groups from throughout Scotland, involving 42,000 youngsters and 4,200 adult volunteers, are affiliated to Youth Scotland. Every town in Scotland has a youth club, which provides a valuable resource of activities for young folk. At a time when we hear so much in the chamber and elsewhere about youth crime and disorder, we should value an organisation that promotes diversionary activities.

After inspecting Youth Scotland in September 2001, Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education stated that Youth Scotland was a very effective organisation that had purpose and direction. Furthermore, it said that Youth Scotland showed a creative approach to attracting funding, was highly valued by its membership and made very good use of external expertise to facilitate that process. However, following that glowing report, Youth Scotland was shocked to discover that its headquarters' core grant funding from the Scottish Executive was cut. It will receive £5,000 less in 2002-03 than it received in 1985-86. It will not have escaped members' attention that, as Donald Gorrie kindly pointed out, we had a Conservative Government in 1985-86, whereas we now have a Labour-Liberal coalition.

Worse still, Youth Scotland's HQ training grant, which has been paid for the past 20 years, has now been withdrawn without any consultation or warning and after the organisation had drawn up staff and board development policies. It goes without saying that—given its good report from HMI and that it feels that it has done everything right—Youth Scotland finds that decision inexplicable. I invite the minister in his winding-up to comment on those points and to tell us whether the Scottish Executive is committed to the youth voluntary sector.

My second point relates to quite a different matter: faith-based social projects. The largest provider of social services in Scotland outwith the state is the Church of Scotland Board of Social Responsibility, which my colleague Lyndsay McIntosh mentioned. At this point, I must declare an interest, as my wife works for the organisation. A few weeks ago, it was forced to close eight care homes and other projects because of inadequate funding from the Executive.

However, it is not just funding issues that affect faith-based providers. A couple of months ago, I had the opportunity to visit the Bethany Christian Trust with the shadow home secretary, Oliver Letwin. Bethany is one of the largest providers of social services in Edinburgh, and concentrates on the disadvantaged, rough sleepers and drug abusers. Some might see such people as the lowest level of humanity and beyond hope, but it was impossible not to be moved by meeting people who had once been in the gutter and who are now leading fulfilling lives because of Bethany's help. Bethany offers an holistic approach and never turns people away. The commitment and care of its staff are second to none. It works because it is a Christian organisation, with an added value that comes from its workers' beliefs. However, the Christian ethos that makes Bethany so attractive and effective also acts as a barrier to its accessing council funding. The Labour-run City of Edinburgh Council will not fund certain Bethany projects because the organisation will not, for faith reasons, sign up to the council's equal opportunities programme. The result is that political correctness is preventing the best standard of care from being given to the poorest and most vulnerable people in our society.

If the Parliament is serious about having a thriving voluntary sector in Scotland, we must treat the sector seriously. As Donald Gorrie said, that means having proper core funding, which must be signalled well in advance. It also requires the removal of barriers to faith-based welfare projects. I trust that the minister will address those points.

11:19

Robin Harper (Lothians) (Green): Before I come to the nub of what I want to say, I will comment on a few speeches. I add my support to Brian Monteith's comments on Scottish Centres, which provide an excellent standard of outdoor education; to Cathy Peattie's remarks on funding; to Robert Brown's remarks on citizens advice bureaux; to Murdo Fraser's remarks on the Bethany Christian Trust, with which I have worked in the past and which provides help swiftly and efficiently to people who need it; and to Adam Ingram's remarks on Facilitate (Scotland), the opening of which I attended last year and which provides an excellent service for depressed people.

I will not, as members might expect, launch into a speech on environmental organisations such as the British Trust for Conservation Volunteers, Community Service Volunteers Environment and the Woodland Trust.

Colin Campbell (West of Scotland) (SNP): You mention them only in passing.

Robin Harper: Yes. I would have liked to have found time to pursue the enormous advantages—which are being wasted—of developing the area waste plan, which could accrue if the Executive and local councils paid more attention to the huge number of voluntary recycling projects, many of which are socially inclusive.

Instead, I will address an issue that came to my notice fairly recently, which is the hidden economy of voluntarism in Scotland—child and adult carers. Murdo Fraser mentioned the Princess Royal Trust for Carers, to which I pay tribute. I alert members to the fact that a new child centre will open in Aberdeen, in advance—I hope—of the Parliament's temporary move to Aberdeen. The work of the Princess Royal Trust for Carers involves huge sensitivities. The reason why we know so little about carers' problems is the sensitivity of carers in revealing their problems.

The Ca(i)re project is a unique project that has come to my notice recently. Eric Liddell won a gold medal at the Olympics while at university in Edinburgh and, incidentally, my auntie Dorea used to cut his hair in prison camp. The Ca(i)re project is run at the Eric Liddell Centre at Holy Corner, which is home to many voluntary organisations. The project aims to provide a social life for adult carers who otherwise hardly ever meet other people. Week in, week out, month in, month out and year in, year out, such carers feel that they must stay at home to take care of adult children or elderly relatives who need constant care and attention. The Ca(i)re project is run by the carers; they decide what they need. Interesting things to do and opportunities to socialise are brought in from outside. The project is unique and immensely valuable. I attended a meeting that was held to discuss its first report. The project is of value for both carers and the cared for, because the carers return to caring with renewed spirit and vigour.

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Mr Murray Tosh): You have one more minute.

Robin Harper: The Executive should do everything that it can to help such projects. At the moment, a minimal level of respite care is available. We should be concerned that such an important project is unique. The project deserves to be replicated throughout Scotland, which is why I want to draw members' attention to it.

Donald Gorrie mentioned competition between local authorities and voluntary organisations. I have examples of such competition, particularly in relation to the provision of a valuable, socially inclusive recycling project. I will not go into detail now—

The Deputy Presiding Officer: You do not have time.

Robin Harper: We should be aware that such conflicts exist.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We come to the closing speeches. Keith Raffan has five minutes. We are slightly behind time, so I would appreciate it if members could pick up the pace a little in the closing speeches.

11:25

Mr Keith Raffan (Mid Scotland and Fife) (LD): I congratulate the Social Justice Committee on its report and the convener on her introductory speech on the report. The report gives a snapshot of the voluntary sector in Scotland. As it points out, evidence was taken almost exclusively from the voluntary sector. As a continuation of the committee's excellent work, it should take evidence from statutory agencies. It is important to integrate statutory agencies and the voluntary sector.

The voluntary sector should not be a way to finance core services on the cheap. From my political and philosophical point of view, that method of financing core services is intrinsically wrong and places unacceptable burdens on volunteers, which leads to what Johann Lamont rightly described as the professionalisation of the voluntary sector. Robert Brown introduced his speech colourfully by giving examples that showed the variety of the sector. I view the voluntary sector more as involving ancillary or extra services—which are crucial—but not core services.

I will give a few examples from recent visits that I have made. Murdo Fraser also did so and it is helpful. The Guide Dogs for the Blind training centre in Forfar is the second biggest employer in the town; Body Positive Tayside does a lot of good work to support HIV and AIDS sufferers; the Sanctuary in Glenrothes helps people with drug misuse problems, particularly problems related to heroin or a combination of heroin and methadone; and Simpson House in Edinburgh, which is run by the Church of Scotland, does tremendously valuable work in helping prisoners who have drug problems and providing throughcare for prisoners when they come out of prison. The voluntary sector has a key and central role in such additional or ancillary services.

As Linda Fabiani eloquently put it, funding is "the biggy". [Interruption.] I am sorry, but the chatting on my left is distracting me. I would like the convener of the Social Justice Committee to listen to this point, because I think that she will agree with it. The lack of stability and security in core funding prevents effective planning and distracts those who are trained and those who are experienced from what they want to do and what they should be doing, which is not scraping around for money. In Kirkcaldy, the Clued Up Project does excellent work in schools to help those who have, or who potentially have, drug and alcohol problems, but it always has to think about whether it has enough money to take it beyond the end of the financial year.

We must address that kind of problem. We need three-year funding. It is not easy for local authorities; they must deal with limited resources, competing demands and ring fencing. When authorities are under pressure they often have to cut what it is easiest to cut—which often means voluntary sector projects. Christine Grahame made a valid point about national insurance increases having a serious impact on local authorities, which only aggravates the problem.

Cathy Peattie rightly referred to the lack of co-ordination between public sector bodies such as social work departments and other local authority departments and health boards. As the report says, it is difficult to get a clear picture of what is funded and by whom, which leads to duplication and overlap. I said earlier, in an intervention, that I believe that the drug and alcohol action teams might be a suitable model. They have successfully brought different public sector bodies together around one table to identify local needs. More important, they have brought the resources around one table in order to target those needs accordingly.

Robert Brown spoke about the need for a voluntary sector development fund, which I support. Such a fund could disburse money through those voluntary sector action teams—for want of another phrase—to ensure that local needs are met. As Johann Lamont said, the voluntary sector must not be top down, but bottom up; or—as I would prefer to put it—the sector should not be Government down, but community up. The best and most successful projects emerge from communities. The danger with that is patchy coverage; in other words, good projects in one area and nothing at all in others. That is why we need the sharing of best practice and of successful projects.

I recently attended a Robertson fund conference on vulnerable children whose parents are being treated for drug misuse. There was a presentation from a Wrexham councillor—a distinguished member of the Labour party, Councillor Malcolm King—who, 20 years ago, founded an adventure playground in one of the most deprived council estates in Wrexham. I knew Malcolm previously. That project has been extraordinarily successful and has led to a 28 per cent reduction in juvenile crime in the town. That is precisely the kind of project that emerges from the community and which we need to stimulate, nurture and support. We do not need to reinvent the wheel; we need to support projects such as this and the Dundee youth project's drop-in centre, The Corner, and Off the Record in Stirling. Those are the projects that we must support, finance and replicate elsewhere.

11:30

Bill Aitken (Glasgow) (Con): I congratulate the Social Justice Committee on a job well done. It is especially pleasing that the committee took the time and trouble to go around Scotland taking evidence, although it seems to have rubbed Mike Rumbles up the wrong way by visiting his constituency without giving him notice. I suggest that Cathie Craigie might have called on him in the early evening; however, it would no doubt have been suggested to her that she had had her tea. Not to worry.

I also congratulate the fourth ministerial team in four years to deal with social justice. I understand that Margaret Curran cannot be with us this morning as she is being sworn in. It occurs to me that people in her role usually end up being sworn at. As they sip from the poisoned chalice of the social justice remit, I wish them well.

This has been a good debate and many good points have been made. Johann Lamont properly noted that many voluntary sector organisations have grown out of an identified need. She also stressed that, although consultation should not be tokenistic, it should not be exhaustive. Those were sound points, which we should all take on board.

Linda Fabiani stressed the problems of funding. I agree with her that it is not good enough that there are difficulties with section 9 and section 10 grants. There is something fundamentally wrong with the system if, even with the advent of three-year budgeting, redundancy notices are issued to staff as a matter of course as the end of the financial year approaches.

Lyndsay McIntosh and others paid tribute to the voluntary sector. It is right to reflect on the fact that 500,000 people regularly volunteer for the 44,000 organisations that are active in the voluntary sector in Scotland. The income of those organisations is between £1.6 billion and £2 billion and they employ 100,000 full-time staff. That is the contribution that people in Scotland make to the voluntary sector, and we should all be proud it. Lyndsay McIntosh also underlined the problems that arise with taxation. Policies are sometimes not thought through. When the Chancellor of the Exchequer decided in his recent budget to increase the level of national insurance contributions, he should have thought of the impact that that would have on charitable bodies, which Lyndsay McIntosh quantified at £46 million.

Robert Brown catalogued the contribution that the voluntary sector makes, although I question whether football supporters clubs should be viewed as either charitable or voluntary. He did well to highlight the degree of bureaucracy that inhibits action on the part of voluntary bodies.

Johann Lamont: Does not the member congratulate the Executive on its support for Supporters Direct? As volunteers and people who are committed to their football clubs, those people are the best hope of saving some of our smaller football teams and ensuring that our larger football teams have more appropriate direction in future.

Bill Aitken: There are issues of funding. I would have been better disposed to congratulate the Executive had more of its members signed my motion congratulating Partick Thistle. However, that is another matter.

As Karen Whitefield rightly said, we must never take the voluntary sector for granted. We must recognise the tremendous amount of good work that those organisations do. It is a little distressing that one of the themes to come through in the evidence that the committee took is the fact that local authorities seem to regard charities and voluntary sector organisations as competitors rather than as allies in doing good. Some thought must be given to that problem.

Donald Gorrie also highlighted that and told us what we already knew—that, in general, people were better off under the Conservatives. He was correct to do so. There seems to be a funding bias against established and successful projects. What is new and innovative is not necessarily always effective, and what Donald Gorrie said had wisdom in it.

Murdo Fraser underlined the contribution that is made by the faith groups, and—despite protestations that he was not going to spend much time dealing with environmental issues—Robin Harper managed to spend 60 per cent of his speech doing so. Finally, Keith Raffan was correct to highlight the fact that the voluntary sector is not about the provision of public services on the cheap, although that is largely what it has become.

This has been a good debate. The committee report is worth while and has given us all the opportunity to recognise the massive contribution that the voluntary sector makes to Scottish society.

11:36

Colin Campbell (West of Scotland) (SNP): I thank the committee for a very good report.

The propellant for ejector seats is manufactured at Bishopton. If Hugh Henry can hang on for a little while, there will be none left and the Executive will have to find another way of putting him out the door when his time comes.

I say to Cathie Craigie that, where I come from, most volunteers are not in the Labour party—most are not in any party. Volunteering is widespread throughout society. We must stress the need for charity law reform. Linda Fabiani mentioned that and the fact that there has been some delay in introducing that reform. Tricia Marwick emphasised the need for a rapid implementation of charity law reform.

Funding is obviously the key. Most of us have been involved with voluntary organisations and recognise sustainable funding as an absolute priority. Linda Fabiani and Johann Lamont made that point. Year-by-year allocations and delays in decisions on funding simply will not do. The last thing that voluntary organisations need is for gaps in funding to occur or for the decisions on the forthcoming financial year to be made so late in the day that the delay creates unnecessary concern and erodes confidence both in the cash provider and in the ability of the voluntary activity to continue. Such indecision saps the willingness of volunteers to continue.

When so many people are prepared to volunteer, the last thing that we want to do is to put unnecessary obstacles in their way. I had experience of an organisation in the east end of Glasgow, which began as a summer society and became an all-year cultural society. Every year, it was dogged by chronic anxiety over whether people's jobs would continue, in an area in which there were few jobs. I therefore welcome the Executive's three-year programme of funding and I hope that the approach will be passed down to local authorities, so that they will take the same view and guarantee funding for projects that they believe are worth while in themselves or which contribute to social inclusion or other objectives.

It is disappointing for many volunteers that they spend a lot of time applying for funds from different organisations, jumping through all the hoops and meeting all the criteria only to submit their application and get no money despite the fact that the next published list of funded organisations includes other projects with plans that are almost identical to theirs. I have in mind a healthy living project in Port Glasgow that applied to the Community Fund. We must try to find some way of avoiding such inconsistency.

Probably the most important issue is the relationship between the donor and the organisation that gets the money. The relationship must be one of genuine partnership, not one in which there are subordinates who get little handouts from time to time. There have been instances of voluntary organisations having mainstream services dumped on them simply because the council had no more money to continue those services. Stand-alone trusts or other organisations have been put off to the side and have then got less money from the council than they received before.

That is not the role of volunteers. It is not their function to pick up services that councils cannot afford to run. The important principle was stated earlier that the best of the voluntary organisations grow from the ground up. That must be encouraged and watered with money.

Transparency and declarations of interest in social inclusion projects have been mentioned. I do not have huge experience of social inclusion projects, but a very reputable friend of mine in the west of Scotland has been deeply involved in all sorts of social inclusion projects. He stood up at a public meeting and innocently suggested to the voluntary organisations present that they might have more freedom of action if they applied for lottery money, as that would keep them out of the clutches of councillor patronage. As a result of that, he lost much of his social inclusion partnership funding. If any members want to know where that took place, I will tell them later.

In the Parliament, we all subscribe to the principle of subsidiarity. That principle must apply at all levels. Political parties should not be able to manipulate voluntary organisations or set up front organisations as covert deliverers of their interests. The Parliament has done well on subsidiarity. The Local Government Committee, of which I was a member, assured councils that it offered no threat to their independence. The Parliament must persuade councils to apply the same principle. Those who are confident in the exercise of their power are not afraid to devolve it. To devolve power is to trust the voluntary organisations to which money has been given. As long as the appropriate financial safeguards are in place and an organisation is fulfilling its objectives, it should be allowed to get on without interference. The volunteers will grow in confidence as a result and will exercise more initiative.

The enormous economic benefit to society of the work done by all the unpaid volunteers throughout society has been mentioned. We cannot discount that work and we must do nothing to discourage it. As members know, we could all name organisations endlessly. The day after the general election last year, I went out with meals on wheels in Johnstone—that was an antidote to the night before. I learned a lot about a system in which people were going out to deliver a service and were making contact with people. They were doing a job that would otherwise have to be paid for. We owe the voluntary sector an enormous debt in cultural, social and sporting terms at every level of society. I toast the volunteers of the voluntary organisations.

11:43

The Deputy Minister for Social Justice (Hugh Henry): I say to Bill Aitken that I believe that, far from being a poisoned chalice, social justice is every bit as much of a challenge as health. It is a privilege to make a small contribution to the work of many important people throughout Scotland. I take seriously Colin Campbell's advice about propellants and ejector seats. Unfortunately, he speaks from first-hand experience, as he told his friends in the SNP in west Renfrewshire about that and they removed him and replaced him with another candidate.

On behalf of the Executive, I welcome the Social Justice Committee's inquiry into the voluntary sector. We recognise the importance of the voluntary sector to Scottish society and, as Helen Eadie said, to the Scottish economy. I am pleased to publish today the Scottish Executive's response to that inquiry.

The Executive sees the voluntary sector as a key social partner. During the debate, many members mentioned the importance of partnership. This is not about one sector threatening another; it is about people working together for the benefit of our communities.

Mr Raffan: On a practical matter, could we receive the Government's response to a committee report earlier next time? It would be helpful if members were able to study it carefully before we spoke in the debate.

Hugh Henry: I will feed that comment back. Keith Raffan probably saw the papers at about the same time as I did, given the events of the past few days, but he makes his point well and I will pass it on.

As many members said, voluntary sector and community groups are in close touch with many parts of Scottish society and they are well placed to identify and respond to changing needs. The sector is uniquely placed to tackle many of the challenging targets that are set by the Executive and it is already a major provider and innovator in housing, child care—which Johann Lamont mentioned—and community care. If it were not for the contribution that is made by many of those organisations and individuals, our society would be much poorer. I know that Margaret Curran has played a huge role in taking that agenda forward and that she has welcomed the comments made by the Social Justice Committee. Unfortunately, as has been mentioned, the minister is not able to be here today because she is being sworn in. She has taken a close personal interest in the issues that we are discussing.

We want the sector to input fully to policy development and to the delivery of services. Working in partnership is the best way in which to meet the challenges that the Executive has set.

We, too, value the independence of the sector. Lyndsay McIntosh said very specifically that there is a need to retain the independence of the sector.

We recognise the outstanding contribution that is made by many thousands of people, who give of their time to serve on management committees and boards. They bring good governance and, in most cases, high ethical standards to the work of their organisations. They have made a contribution to the debate on improving standards in our society.

The Executive is committed to working in partnership with the voluntary sector. That commitment is embodied in the Scottish compact. Cathie Craigie was right to raise the issue of compacts. The partnership between the Executive and the sector must be strengthened and compacts could also make a local contribution.

The Executive's experience of the Scottish compact has been positive—although no doubt it can be improved—and we recognise the value of such arrangements. We know that a number of local authorities have agreed local compacts with the voluntary sector and we think that more local authorities should do the same. We welcome the extension of compacts and the development of volunteering policies by many local authorities and NHS boards.

From contact with groups in my area, I know about the contribution that volunteers make. There is still bureaucracy at local authority and health board level that needs to be examined and challenged in order to make it easier for people to get services. That is not about providing services "on the cheap"—as Keith Raffan said. Rather, we should recognise that the voluntary sector can make a difference in a different way. It is about complementing and supporting, rather than replacing.

We believe that the community planning process will enhance the relationships between local authorities and public agencies operating at a local level. We are committed to working together with the voluntary sector, local authorities and others to strengthen and deepen those relationships.

We acknowledge some of the comments that have been made about infrastructure. We need to strengthen the infrastructure. As several members—including Johann Lamont, Linda Fabiani, Karen Whitefield, Cathy Peattie, Keith Raffan and Murdo Fraser—have said, core funding and stability of funding are critical if good organisations are to have the assurance to plan for the future and the ability to deliver consistent services.

We have made a commitment to strengthen the infrastructure of the sector; to review funding principles and processes; to promote volunteering, in particular by young people but also by older people—as Helen Eadie said, we should not forget the important contribution that many older people make to helping others in our society; and to support measures to promote the use of new technology in the voluntary sector, including the establishment of a web-based portal.

We are strengthening the voluntary sector infrastructure, for example by doubling the funding to the national networks of councils for voluntary services and volunteer centres, and by funding key organisations such as the SCVO and Volunteer Development Scotland.

Helen Eadie raised the issue of mainstreaming. We are committed to promoting and mainstreaming voluntary sector issues across departments. That process will be reinforced and supported by a number of mechanisms and structures that are aimed at improving policy making. Those include the Scottish compact, to which I have referred, and the Scottish Executive/voluntary sector forum, which plays a crucial role in improving dialogue and understanding between the Executive and the sector.

The provision of a broad range of funding schemes, both direct and indirect, is critical. The Executive's schemes are publicised in our leaflet "A Guide for the Voluntary Sector to Scottish Executive Grants", which is updated annually. Linda Fabiani asked about section 9 and 10 funding. Section 9 grants are being reviewed and no money is available for new grants at this time. Existing projects have been continued for one year. Generally, we are committed to making decisions on grants three months before they are due to begin. The system is not perfect, but we are working to improve it. We will bear in mind the points that Linda Fabiani made.

We are sponsoring Volunteer Development Scotland to manage free SCRO checks—which were mentioned during the debate—for volunteers in the voluntary sector. A number of speakers—Lyndsay McIntosh, Robert Brown, Karen Whitefield and Donald Gorrie—referred to problems with regulation and bureaucracy.

Robert Brown rose—

Hugh Henry: Unfortunately, I do not have time to take an intervention.

Johann Lamont raised the issue of regulation and training. We need to avoid having excessive regulation and interference, but we must impose minimum acceptable standards to ensure that organisations have an infrastructure that is capable of giving security not just to those who volunteer and provide services, but to the recipients of services. A balance needs to be struck.

Providing financial resources for the services that I have mentioned is one of the main ways in which the Executive supports the voluntary sector. We have made available increased resources across the board. We have increased funding for voluntary sector infrastructure from £4 million to £10 million, and for direct grant funding from £23 million to £39 million annually. That money is in addition to some £304 million that is made available indirectly to the voluntary sector through Communities Scotland, NHS boards and local enterprise companies, for example.

We have made a commitment to funding for the voluntary sector. We recognise that there is a problem with short-term funding and that more stability and longer funding cycles are needed. We hope that local authorities and others will emulate our example. We need to take a strategic view of funding.

Today, we are publishing our response to the consultation on our review of direct funding of the voluntary sector. That response sets out our plans to reform the arrangements for direct funding of the voluntary sector in Scotland. We shall adopt a number of principles and processes to make it easier for voluntary organisations to apply for funding.

Because of lack of time, I will unfortunately have to skip some of the issues that have been raised. Those include crucial issues such as the funding and supporting of organisations in rural areas. Johann Lamont, Linda Fabiani and others referred to the contribution that is made by the social economy and we will consider that issue closely. I have worked in the social economy, know what contribution it makes and have a personal interest in it. I will be pleased to follow that through. Members have referred to the need to provide support for volunteering and I will not repeat the points that have been made.

The Executive has an ambitious but realistic vision for the voluntary sector and we are making a firm commitment to back that vision with active support. The sector is vital to our shared social justice agenda. It engages people in society and provides opportunities for the expression of active citizenship. We now have the opportunity to build on a good working relationship with the sector.

I will finish by putting on record my appreciation, and that of colleagues such as Margaret Curran and Iain Gray, for the hard work, commitment and energy that the voluntary sector has brought to our work. We thank the sector for that. The committee's report has played a major part in giving proper recognition to the sector's very valuable work throughout Scotland.

11:54

Mr Kenneth Gibson (Glasgow) (SNP): I pay tribute to Johann Lamont for valiantly introducing the debate, despite the fact that she is feeling rather wonky today. I welcome our Shug to the social justice team and welcome back Margaret Curran from her swearing-in session. It has been a long, slow struggle to the top for her, but she has finally made it.

Like other speakers, when taking evidence from around Scotland I was impressed by the passion, enthusiasm, commitment and professionalism of people working in the voluntary sector. As Johann Lamont indicated, the sector is diverse and flexible. Despite obvious financial constraints, it delivers first-class services through trained and highly motivated staff. As Johann added, the heart of the sector is vital. It must not be patronised, but it should be celebrated and taken seriously.

The issue of funding played a major part in today's debate. Johann Lamont talked about the need for honesty when considering what the sector requires to function effectively. Real costs must be considered and core funding is crucial. I was heartened by much that the minister said on that issue.

The voluntary sector's need for moneys to cover salaries, training, security, sick pay, pensions, heating and lighting costs, and, of course, inflation must be recognised. Keith Raffan talked about not reinventing the wheel and not—[Interruption.] It would help if I could read my writing—I should have been a doctor rather than a politician. Keith said that the voluntary sector does not exist to fund the statutory sector "on the cheap". He went on to say that we need to share best practice in the voluntary sector to avoid duplication and to ensure continuity. I am sure that all of us echo those sentiments.

Linda Fabiani raised the issue of section 9 and 10 grants, and Hugh Henry dealt with that adequately. She also talked about the worry and pressure that voluntary groups feel when funding periods draw to a close and redundancy notices have to be sent out. Funding streams are too insecure and in many cases funding is unrealistic. Time scales for funding bids are unrealistic and great strain is placed on resources and the skills of people who work in the voluntary sector. Although innovation and new initiatives should not be the sole criteria for funding, groups should not be funded just because they always have been. That point was made in evidence that the committee took at Inverness. A balance needs to be struck.

Concerns were raised in evidence that funding streams are too insecure to guarantee loans and benefit from the social investment Scotland scheme. I hope that the Executive will consider that issue in more detail.

Cathy Peattie talked about groups having to reinvent themselves and develop skills in response to continual changes in criteria for funding. I hope that we will tackle that waste of resources.

Donald Gorrie said that funding was "an absolute disgrace" and that the sector is often seen

"as a competitor and possibly even as an enemy"

by organisations in the statutory sector. We must take that point seriously.

Robert Brown proposed the establishment of a voluntary sector development fund. That seems like a robust idea.

Brian Monteith touched on the new opportunities fund. It is heartening to see that the fund intends to implement the committee's recommendation that three to five-year funding periods be introduced, to enable realistic planning and the establishment of management provisions. Of course, the fund could have gone further to ensure that the poorest communities benefit disproportionately from resources. Later in my speech, I will take issue with Mike Rumbles on that point.

A number of members referred to the independence of the sector and I am pleased that the minister recognised that. There will always be a trade-off between an organisation having the independence to follow its own agenda and the reality of contracting with those who fund groups. The role of an effective and efficient management committee is important in ensuring that statutory agencies are aware of the voluntary sector and the culture in which it works.

It is fundamental that there should be equality of esteem between the sector and the Parliament. The Parliament has already established a compact with local government to ensure equality of esteem between both parties. Perhaps that should be widened to include the voluntary sector.

Lyndsay McIntosh expressed concern about the possibility of parts of the voluntary sector being absorbed into government. She talked about how the sector could become beholden to public agencies. I echo the point that voluntary organisations should be seen as partners, rather than subjects.

In Inverness, the comments were made that the compact is invisible, that it might as well not exist and that it is not worth the paper that it is written on. That concerned me and other committee members; we should address how the compact is working on the ground. The concern was emphasised that if a project is successful, local authorities or other agencies might take over the work when funding is exhausted and might take the credit for success. Mike Rumbles talked about rurality. He seemed to have the hump about not having been notified of the Social Justice Committee's visit to his domain. However, I have here a copy of a letter that was sent to Mr Rumbles on 9 October. The letter says:

"Dear Mike Rumbles

Social Justice Committee - Voluntary Sector Inquiry - Site Visits

You may be aware that the Scottish Parliament's Social Justice Committee is undertaking an inquiry into the Voluntary Sector ...

A series of fact-finding visits is planned to each of the 8 Parliamentary regions and I am writing to advise you that members of the Committee will be visiting Aberdeen on Monday 22 October to meet with local groups and experience what is happening "on the ground" ... This letter is to inform you that this visit is being held in your area."

It supplied details of who to contact if Mr Rumbles wanted further information—sorry, Mike.

In the Highlands and Islands, but not in Aberdeen, the concern was expressed that peripherality was not recognised. In Inverness, the sector was described as

"woefully inadequate to meet the demands of the region."

Concern was expressed that a flat rate of £60,000 for strategic planning—divided into eight or nine groups because of the geography of the Highlands and Islands, compared with two or three groups in less rural areas—made it impossible to fund the sector Highland-wide.

Concern was also expressed that the committee was a central belt group and was not concerned about rurality. I would like Mike Rumbles to focus on the committee's recommendations on page 17 of the report, which state:

"(i) The Scottish Executive should clarify how the problem of rurality is dealt with in funding arrangements for the Voluntary Sector.

(ii) The Scottish Executive should explore alternative ways of communication for voluntary sector organisations in rural areas, and whether there are more suitable ways of providing services in these areas."

Mr Rumbles: I am happy to come to the substantive point of my speech. I was making the point that the report was a missed opportunity. Although the report says that the Scottish Executive should "clarify", it does not make any suggestions arising from its investigation. It has come up with nothing, except to ask the Executive to investigate.

Mr Gibson: With respect, we based the report on the evidence that we took. We wanted to give the Executive the opportunity to come back on it. That does not mean that the subject will be done and dusted for all eternity. I am sure that other committee members will take on board the comments that Mike Rumbles has made. There are no problems with considering the matter further.

Robert Brown focused on the regulatory burdens that are imposed on the sector and the burden that the national insurance increase will have on smaller organisations. He talked passionately—as he has done many times before—about the impact of legislation on citizens advice bureaux. He made a plea for legislation on debt advice services.

Other members talked about the lack of transparency in the regulatory framework, which we must address. Smaller organisations might find it difficult to be good employers that adhere to employment law. Staff in the voluntary sector often work longer than they are paid for and we must address that.

Positive comments were made regarding the voluntary issues unit; people said that there were good relations with the Executive. However, some felt that the local infrastructure was often weak, that resources were inadequate and that organisations were being dragged away from the objectives for which they were founded. The sector is keen to know not just what decisions local authorities make—particularly regarding funding—but why they are made.

Linda Fabiani mentioned social inclusion partnerships and Cathy Peattie talked about the need for black and ethnic minority people to be included in discussions on infrastructure.

Volunteering is not cost free and it is important to review the level of expenses that are provided to volunteers to attract people from socially excluded and far-flung rural areas—I address that point to Mike Rumbles. In many places volunteers are in short supply, not only in remote areas but in Lothian, which was mentioned in evidence-taking sessions.

The needs of disabled volunteers are not considered as much as they should be and we have to consider the possible divides between paid staff and volunteers and the fear that some paid staff have of litigation for negligence. We have to raise awareness of the benefits of volunteering and make an effort to retain as many experienced volunteers as possible.

The minister will be aware that there are concerns about the apparent lack of progress of the Scottish Charity Law Review Commission. The front-page headline of last Friday's edition of Third Force News said:

"Sector demands progress on charity law reforms".

Councillor Jean McFadden, who chaired the Scottish Charity Law Review Commission, has made clear her frustration that a year after its report, which contained 114 recommendations, was published no proposed legislation is in place. The SCVO echoed those concerns. Johann Lamont mentioned a timetable for making progress on that and Linda Fabiani echoed that point. I hope that the minister will take that on board.

At the Social Justice Committee's meeting on 12 December, the then deputy minister said with reference to the social economy:

"Stephen Maxwell from the SCVO is carrying out that review and will report to the minister later this month. The review will look at the contribution of the social economy to service provision and economic prosperity."—[Official Report, Social Justice Committee, 12 December 2001; c 2722.]

Although the committee made it clear that it does not doubt the Executive's commitment to the review, concerns continue to be expressed by the committee, the SCVO and others about the continued delay in its completion and publication. As Johann Lamont pointed out, the co-operative and mutual sector is important.

In conclusion—you are giving me the cold stare, Presiding Officer—I will mention just one other thing. We must, as Johann Lamont said, avoid paralysis by consultation. Evidence suggests that realistic time scales are needed for organisations to canvass opinions. Linda Fabiani echoed that and said that it took the Executive, with all its resources, two months to respond to our recommendations.

On behalf of the committee, I thank Johann Lamont, for convening it so well; the witnesses, who gave up so much time, effort and energy to provide evidence; the ministers, for responding so positively to our recommendations; and Uncle Tom Cobbleigh and all.

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): The member did everything but declare the fête open.

New National Qualifications

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): We come now, slightly late I am afraid, to the important statement by Cathy Jamieson on the new national qualifications. I ask those who wish to ask questions to press their buttons during the statement.

12:07

The Minister for Education and Young People (Cathy Jamieson): I should have realised on entering the chamber that any hope that we might be early was likely to be short-lived.

I am pleased to be here today. It is almost a year since Jack McConnell, as Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs, announced that he would take forward the recommendations that were made in the review of the initial implementation of the national qualifications. He announced that the Executive would consult on the future of assessment in the new qualifications and he also announced the setting up of the national qualifications task group to oversee the implementation of the recommendations.

Today, I intend to announce the outcome of the consultation on assessment within the new national qualifications and provide an update on how we are implementing the other recommendations. I will also talk about progress on preparations for this year's examinations.

It is helpful to remind ourselves of the principles of the national qualifications that the review identified. Those included: improving attainment across the curriculum; supporting equality of opportunity; enabling and promoting a high-quality learning experience; providing an integrated system of nationally recognised qualifications; providing qualifications that are matched to students' abilities and the requirements of users; enabling qualifications to be built up over time; and encouraging students to progress to the highest level that they can achieve.

The principles were strongly supported by those who responded to the consultation. In the consultation process, respondents were asked to consider two main options. In simple terms, option A suggested removing the compulsory internal assessment, although it would remain for those who wanted it. Option B removed the end-of-course exam, although again it would remain for those wanted it. People were also asked to consider whether any other fundamental change was required or indeed whether they rejected all the options. An independent analysis of the responses has been undertaken and a report will be published as soon as possible. Everyone who responded was keen to see the work load and undue pressure on candidates reduced, although there were different views about how that should be done.

Only a third of the responses, including very few from organisations and institutions, were in favour of option A. A small percentage favoured option B, or options A and B combined. We were therefore left in a situation where around half the responses favoured neither option. It was clear that respondents felt that the burden of assessment on candidates and teachers could be sufficiently reduced without changing the formal status of internal or external assessment. There was also a call for stability in the system and time to allow the new system to bed in. Many suggested the need to re-establish credibility in the exam system and to avoid changes that could cause any risk to the system. Many also said that, rather than introducing major change, we should allow the subject reviews to be implemented and improve the provision of support to schools and colleges. The view from young people who contributed to the consultation was that they wanted internal assessments to provide better information about their progress and a reduction in the total time spent on assessment.

Having considered all the views, I believe that we need to find a solution that significantly reduces the burden of assessment while maintaining standards of both internal and external assessment. Like many of those who responded, I recognise that the system will work only if we make substantial improvements to it and make significant reductions in the work load on candidates and teachers. I am determined to ensure that we make those changes. Work has already started and we intend to complete it. I am asking the national qualifications task and steering groups to carry out work along with the Scottish Qualifications Authority and stakeholders to deliver on our commitment to reduce the burden of assessment on teachers and pupils.

The work in progress will lead to a system that is rigorous and robust but also manageable for those who participate in it. The SQA has completed thorough reviews of the assessment arrangements for all new national qualifications courses. Its proposals have now been carefully reviewed by the national qualifications task and steering groups, which include representatives from teachers associations, further education, education authorities and employers. We have agreed to place strict limits on the time spent on each element of external, and particularly internal, assessment. In many courses, that will result in a reduction of well over 50 per cent in the time required for assessment. Particular care has been taken to identify and eliminate unnecessary duplication. For example, in science subjects, the same practical skills were previously tested in every unit, whereas they will now be tested only once during each course.

Ministers have already endorsed the changes proposed for the first two batches of subjects. I am pleased to announce today that we endorse the proposals for all remaining subjects. Seventy subjects covering more than 200 courses have now been reviewed. We are working with the SQA to agree a programme of work to implement the necessary changes as soon as possible. Significant changes have already been made for this session and for courses starting in the summer. Those changes are all designed to reduce unnecessary demands and to simplify arrangements, while maintaining and improving quality.

In 17 subjects, the reviews have identified the need for more fundamental work to be done. Short-term improvements are being made where possible, but we have agreed with the SQA that it must take a careful look at course content and structure as well as at the relationship between courses and the details of assessment. That work will require time, but I want to get on with it as a matter of urgency. In geography, for example, the number and length of internal assessments at higher level will be reduced for next session.

We need to build in thorough scrutiny and review of all courses to ensure that we never again reach a point at which teachers and candidates cannot cope with the assessment demands that are placed on them. We will agree new arrangements with the SQA and work with key stakeholders to ensure that lessons have been learned and are acted on.

Assessment work covers more than just unit assessments and final exams. Teachers also carry out assessments to prepare evidence for appeals, prepare estimates of final awards and give feedback to candidates about their progress. In the responses to the consultation and the seminars that were run as part of the consultation process, the message came out loud and clear that we need to address that area.

We will continue to produce national assessment bank items to test whether individual units have been achieved and we will work with the SQA to provide support and advice to teachers on how to use those items. We will also work with the SQA and the task and steering groups to develop a toolkit of assessment items and support materials to help teachers to minimise the work that is associated with other aspects of assessment. The toolkit will include exemplar materials, marking schemes and advice on how to avoid duplication of effort, for example.

The national qualifications review also identified the need to establish a better common understanding of standards. Examples of what has been delivered so far include exemplars of candidates' work, marker guidelines for seven subjects, including on-line training for markers, and feedback on appeals. Much has been done, but there is still more to do.

This year, the SQA, schools and colleges have worked hard to eliminate many practical administrative problems that are associated with assessment, such as ensuring that the data that are held by the SQA about each candidate are accurate. Centres have already reported a substantial reduction in the number of problems, but work on streamlining and improving systems and data exchange will continue. Much work has also been done on the recruitment of markers and markers' fees. A review of fees has taken place, which included a survey of markers.

I want to say a few words on the SQA's progress towards this year's exams. The exams started a couple of days ago—we all wish the candidates every success. Over the past few months, in the run-up to the exams round, the SQA has engaged with all key stakeholders—schools, colleges and candidates—and has listened and acted on concerns or issues that have been raised. The process has enabled the SQA to plan the arrangements for the exams round much earlier than ever before. All the required markers are in place.

Standard grade has been the subject of much press speculation over the past couple of weeks. Standard grade provides a wide range of high-quality courses that are suitable for secondary pupils of all abilities and interests. Access and intermediate courses provide a wide range of courses and units that are designed for learners of all ages, abilities and interests. Both types of course are suitable for secondary school pupils. Some schools are taking advantage of the new flexibilities to make careful decisions about which courses and units best meet the needs of their learners. That in no way undermines the value of standard grades. The consultation called for stability in the system. It is important for stability to be applied to standard grade as well as to the new national qualifications. Therefore, I do not propose to make any changes to the system of standard grades for the time being.

The consultation exercise showed that many people recognise the positive aspects of the current qualifications system, but significant improvements are needed to reduce work loads, while maintaining standards. We have already made major improvements. Today, I have confirmed the principles of the national qualifications assessment system and outlined the further work that will need to be done. We have listened to and will continue to listen to teachers, lecturers and the management in schools and colleges who are at the front end of teaching. We have also listened to the young people who are at the front end of learning. Through working together, we will deliver improvements to benefit all those who have a stake in Scottish education.

The Presiding Officer: I have quite a long list of members who would like to ask questions, so we will move on briskly.

Michael Russell (South of Scotland) (SNP): I thank the minister for her statement, which is in the way of a progress report on the normalisation of the Scottish exams system.

It is incredible that, having had a consultation exercise, the minister can come up with the conclusion that

"we need to find a solution that significantly reduces the burden of assessment while maintaining standards of both internal and external assessment."

That was the conclusion of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee's report on the SQA two years ago. We did not need to have another consultation in order to reach that conclusion.

I welcome the fact that progress is being made, but some key questions need to be addressed, three of which I will ask. First, as Ian Jenkins pointed out several times in the inquiry, one of the key problems with introducing the new exams was that teachers' fears about a range of difficulties were not addressed. Given that, how are we making sure that parents, teachers and young people are fully involved in the changes? Previously, changes took place despite the views of individuals in consultation exercises.

Secondly, given that we need to see the benefits of the changes rapidly—because, as the minister's statement admits, we still have an examination system that over-assesses and is not properly attuned to the needs of young people—when will that process be concluded? When will the Scottish exams system do what it should do?

Thirdly, on the question of the standard grade qualification, does the minister accept that one of the key issues in examinations is to make absolutely certain that employers, parents and young people understand what the certificates mean? The variation in the type of certificate that young people get is now wider than ever, so it must be right to ensure that we have a standardised approach. If experimentation is taking place in a number of schools, we need a national examination of the way in which that can move forward. Simply to say that we propose to do nothing means that the confusion will get worse. Will the minister consider examining the Scottish examination system closely to ensure that the present confusion about what results mean is not made worse?

Cathy Jamieson: In responding to those points, I remind Mike Russell that I was a member of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee during the SQA inquiry and was aware of people's feelings at the time.

I hope that what I have outlined today will have addressed the concerns of pupils, parents and teachers. We have taken views from all the key stakeholders. The clear message to come from that process was that people wanted the burden of assessment reduced. In certain subject areas, we have been able to reduce the number of assessments from 12 to three and to reduce the amount of time spent on those internal assessments from around 10 hours to three hours.

We will see the benefits of those changes, which are taking place at the moment. We will continue to make progress in those areas. It is important that we reflect on the situation as we continue, which is why I want the steering group to continue to examine the areas in which there is further work to be done. More must be done on the relationships between the various levels of courses. In some subject areas, that will take some time to put right.

Mike Russell asked when the Scottish examination system would return to a degree of normality. For the vast majority of young people who are sitting their examinations, the system is providing a good-quality service that will provide the outcomes that they require. It is important that, at a time when young people are sitting their standard grade exams, which began only two days ago, we send a clear message that the work that they and their teachers have done to meet their expectations and their parents' expectations has not been in vain. The standard grade is an important qualification. Of course we will continue to review matters, but it is important to ensure that we get all the other elements correct, including the assessment processes, before we make any fundamental changes. I hope that Mike Russell will accept that.

Mike Russell also asked about people's understanding of the qualifications. Although I understand that the Confederation of British Industry has said that it is relatively relaxed about the range of examination certificates, there is an issue, particularly in relation to certain areas of employment, about the lack of understanding among parents and others who are confronted with examination certificates that differ from what they are used to. Clearly, we want to do as much as we can to give people information and advice about the qualifications. However, that is not to suggest that the fundamental principles of what we are doing with the examination systems are wrong.

Mr Brian Monteith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con): I thank the minister for providing me with an advance copy of her statement. I associate myself with Mike Russell's initial comments about the nature of the statement, which was more of a progress report than an announcement to the chamber of earth-shattering news.

The statement is welcome all the same. I welcome the progress that is being made in reducing the element of assessment, not just for pupils, but particularly for teachers. That reduction will be crucial if we are to attract more people into teaching. I also welcome the recent announcement—which was not mentioned in the statement—on returning examination scripts, which will contribute to greater faith in the national qualifications.

I have two questions for the minister. First, does she agree that it is crucial that those who leave school at the age of 16 are given the opportunity to obtain qualifications that are of real value? In that respect, external assessment has a key role to play in maintaining standards that will be recognised not only by those who gain qualifications, but by employers. There should be no diminution of external assessment in standard grade or higher still, which are now called national qualifications.

My second question is on the description and understanding of the national qualifications, which Mike Russell rightly asked about. I am troubled by the fact that most people—who are not involved in education circles and have not heard the minister's statement—will probably find the language of the national qualifications to be full of the jargon of an anorak. I am concerned about the morass of descriptions of our qualifications system: foundation, general and credit in standard grade; and access, intermediate 1, intermediate 2, higher and advanced higher in higher still. I would not be surprised to learn that not only pupils but many employers find those descriptions confusing. Although it is important to allow things to bed down and to get the processes right, does the minister agree that tidying up the language and synthesising the qualifications might be beneficial? That approach would allow intermediate 1 and intermediate 2—if they overlap with standard grade—to become standard 1 and standard 2. It would also clarify the qualifications that are available. That would help the credibility of our examination system and benefit pupils and employers.

Cathy Jamieson: Brian Monteith said that my statement was, in a sense, a progress report. The nature of the SQA's problems, which we all witnessed not so very long ago, was such that it was important for me to give a progress report at this time. I hope that people will accept that the appropriate way for me to do so was by way of a statement and that that approach was part of being accountable, which is important.

It is important for young people who leave school at the age of 16 to do so with qualifications that they and their parents, potential employers and colleges know the value of. Part of the reason why I believe that it is important for me to give a statement while young people are sitting their exams is that it allows me to give the clear message that the qualifications that they leave school with are valuable and are understood by employers and others. We are not seeking to undermine the examination process in any way.

I take on board Brian Monteith's question about whether we are all anoraks for understanding the national qualifications. I have found in my discussions with young people that they are invariably far more informed about the qualifications and use the jargon much more often than even those of us in the chamber who are anoraks. As I am keen to try to eliminate jargon, we may have to consider how we explain the processes in future. That is an important point.

Ian Jenkins (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD): I welcome the direction that the statement takes. It was a big statement and its details require more consideration than we can give them today.

I am pleased that the consultation is producing results. I especially welcome the repeated commitment that the burden of assessment and administration will be reduced further. As has been said, the minister has given us a progress report; she has acknowledged that it is a progress report and it is important that that should be recognised.

I also welcome the acceptance that, as far as subjects are concerned, one size fits all is not what we are about and that some subjects need further consideration. The minister has accepted that the approach should not just be a global one without real consideration of the issues.

I am still worried that we have a system in which assessments get in the way of real teaching and learning. We will have to wait and see how the system works, but there might still be inappropriate and superfluous unit assessment. I hope that that can be reconsidered. We have made a step in the right direction and I hope that the issue will be part of the continuing national debate on education.

My question is simple and I know the answer before I ask it—the answer will be yes. Will the minister guarantee that she will listen in person to teachers and pupils in their response to the statement? There are always glitches and there are always times when we think that we have done the right thing but it turns out that we have not. Will she listen carefully and be prepared to shift on the issues? I hope that she will not rely solely on advice that is channelled through organisations, but listen to the people on the ground. Will she confirm that the statement is a stage in a continuing process that will make a difference in the classroom?

Cathy Jamieson: I am happy to reassure Ian Jenkins that I will listen to teachers and young people. He knows that, when I visited his part of the world yesterday, I took considerable time to listen to a range of people who are involved in education, including some talented young people. I assure him that we will continue to progress in consultation with all stakeholders.

I also reassure him that assessment is for a purpose. One of those purposes is to aid a young person's learning. Young people were clear that they wanted feedback from assessment that would aid their future learning. We will attach importance to that view.

Marilyn Livingstone (Kirkcaldy) (Lab): I welcome the statement and agree with the minister that the work has to be advanced as a matter of urgency.

I have two points to raise. First, I agree with the minister that a qualification has to be seen as valuable. The Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee is carrying out a review on the Scottish credit and qualifications framework. Does the minister agree that qualifications have to be portable as well as valuable? People have to be able to carry their qualifications into the next level and into lifelong learning. It is important that all young people feel that their qualifications can be taken with them as they progress up the ladder. What are the minister's views on that?

Secondly, will the minister be a wee bit more specific about the work on markers' work loads and how recruitment is progressing?

Cathy Jamieson: Again, I am happy to reassure Marilyn Livingstone about portability. Obviously, it is important that we try to set a framework for children in school whereby they can move into lifelong learning at various stages and build on the work that they have already done. I am happy to discuss that further with the member as we progress.

It is useful to note that this year the SQA has been able to recruit the required number of markers earlier in the process than was the case last year. The people are in place. We gave a commitment to review the markers' work load and to consider their fees. This year, we are considering the work that markers undertake during the year and, on the basis of what we find, we will make proposals that will have implications for the future. We must do that in a considered and studied way so that we can get things right in future.

Irene McGugan (North-East Scotland) (SNP): Given the recent recognition of the stress levels that many teachers face, what priority is being given to agreeing the new arrangements with the SQA so that, in the minister's words,

"we never again reach a point at which teachers ... cannot cope"?

Cathy Jamieson: I am happy to reassure Irene McGugan on that issue. On my visit to the Borders yesterday, I found it interesting to note that some young people identified that it was not in their interests to have stressed teachers. I hope that I have given a clear message, but I will state it again. We are trying to reduce unnecessary burdens and to avoid duplication of effort, as that causes problems for teachers and young people.

A considerable amount of work is going on. My colleague Nicol Stephen has been progressing several issues with the SQA and he will continue to do that. We seek to ensure that we all work together and that the improvements that we desire are delivered. We will keep a close watch on that.

Dr Sylvia Jackson (Stirling) (Lab): I welcome the statement about the reduction in assessment, particularly the reduction in internal assessment. I want to ask about the relationship of assessment to teaching and learning, which is an issue that I have raised before. I noted Brian Monteith's remarks about the return of marked scripts. I urge the minister to proceed with the use of marked scripts for the professional development of teachers. As a former marker, I know how much the study of marked scripts helped me to teach in the classroom by helping me to identify the kind of errors that pupils made.

Cathy Jamieson: Sylvia Jackson's contribution was helpful. I know that she takes a keen interest in the matter and I will be happy to pursue it. I would be keen to hear from her about any other issues that we might want to consider.

Murdo Fraser (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con): I was interested in the minister's comments on standard grades. Will she confirm that she is content for individual schools to decide for themselves which exams—whether higher still or standard grades—to present candidates for?

Cathy Jamieson: The flexibility that schools have means that that option is available to them. A number of schools have taken up the option over a period of time. That has often been done on a subject-by-subject, rather than on a whole-school, basis. I expect that any decision to pursue that option will be preceded by a full consultation with young people and staff, so that the decision is made in the knowledge that it is in the best interests of the young people at the school in question.

Cathy Peattie (Falkirk East) (Lab): I remind the minister that one of the main areas that the Education, Culture and Sport Committee identified in its consideration of the SQA was a lack of communication between the SQA and teachers. I ask that teachers be listened to and kept up to date with any changes, so that they will be ready for them when they occur. The consultation process is important because it is a significant element of communication. I also ask the minister to confirm that implementation will take place in time for this year's examinations, so that we will not experience a repeat of the fiasco that we had in the past.

Cathy Jamieson: Cathy Peattie has been closely involved in consideration of the SQA through the work of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee and I know that she takes a particular interest in the consultation process. Consultation is important, because if we do not include all the key stakeholders in consultation, problems will arise, as has happened in the past. I give an assurance that the consultation process will continue.

We have kept a close eye on SQA developments and we have confidence that the mistakes that were made and some of the problems that were experienced have been addressed. A number of systems have been put in place and we are in a much better position than we were in at the same stage last year. We are well on track to deliver in this year's exams process.

Point of Order

12:38

The Deputy Minister for Parliamentary Business (Euan Robson): I understand that one or two members' votes were not recorded last evening. I have asked those members to check their cards, but I would like the system to be checked before this evening to ensure that it is working correctly.

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): If you will be kind enough to provide the names of the members concerned and to indicate where they were sitting, I will make sure that the system is checked over lunch time. I do not wish to be unkind to Liberal Democrat members or to members of any party, but past experience has shown that human error rather than equipment error is usually responsible.

Business Motion

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): The next item of business is business motion S1M-3080, in the name of Patricia Ferguson.

12:39

The Deputy Minister for Parliamentary Business (Euan Robson): Before I move the motion, I inform members that it relates to business for the weeks that begin on 13 May and 27 May respectively. The later of those weeks is the week that the Parliament meets in Aberdeen. Although there is no plenary business for the week that begins on 20 May, I emphasise that that week is not a recess week. It is important to make that point in view of recent media coverage. To compensate for the absence of committee meetings during the week beginning 27 May, when the Parliament meets in Aberdeen, extra time is being made available for committees.

I move,

That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business—

Wednesday 15 May 2002

2.30 pm Time for Reflection

followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions

followed by Executive Debate on the Scottish Fire Service of the Future

followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions

5.00 pm Decision Time

followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-3076 Michael Russell: Scottish Criminal Record Office

Thursday 16 May 2002

9.30 am Executive Debate on Investment and Reform in Health and Community Care

followed by Business Motion

2.30 pm Question Time

3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time

3.30 pm Motion on the Golden Jubilee

4.00 pm Executive Debate on National Waste Strategy

followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions

5.00 pm Decision Time

followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-2622 Marilyn Livingstone: Cross-Party Support for a Review of the Construction Industry in Scotland

Tuesday 28 May 2002

9.30 am Time for Reflection

followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions

followed by Executive Debate on the Modernising Government Fund

11.30 am HM the Queen's Address

2.30 pm Executive Debate on Oil and Gas Industry

followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions

5.00 pm Decision Time

followed by Members' Business

Wednesday 29 May 2002

9.30 am Executive Debate on Alternatives to Custody

followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions

2.30 pm Scottish National Party Business

followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions

5.00 pm Decision Time

followed by Members' Business

Thursday 30 May 2002

9.30 am Ministerial Statement and Debate on the Executive's Programme

followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions

followed by Business Motion

2.00 pm Question Time

3.00 pm First Minister's Question Time

3.30 pm Executive Debate on Implementing the Cancer Strategy

5.00 pm Decision Time

followed by Members' Business.

Motion agreed to.

12:40

Meeting suspended until 14:30.

14:30

On resuming—

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): Before we begin question time, I am sure that members will want to welcome the chairman and members of the House of Commons Select Committee on Procedure, who are in the gallery. [Applause.] I am sure that they are here to learn something to their advantage.

Question Time

SCOTTISH EXECUTIVE

Research Parks (Ayrshire)

1. John Scott (Ayr) (Con): To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to establish a research park in Ayrshire. (S1O-5136)

The Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning (Iain Gray): This is a matter for the enterprise network. I understand that Scottish Enterprise Ayrshire is currently working with Scottish Enterprise Glasgow, Scottish Enterprise Lanarkshire, Scottish Enterprise Dunbartonshire and Scottish Enterprise Renfrewshire to review market demand and supply of research-based accommodation for the biotech sector in support of Scottish Enterprise's biotech cluster. The outcome of the review will determine what additional physical investment is required to support the west of Scotland biotech industry, and it will help to position Ayrshire's Hannah research park in the regional market.

John Scott: The minister will be aware of the recently announced joint venture, called CHARIS, between the Scottish Agricultural College at Auchincruive and the Hannah Research Institute. Does he agree that those two distinguished institutions working in partnership can form a basis for the development of a research or bioscience park in Ayrshire? Given the significant number of job losses in Ayrshire, is he prepared to support that idea and to enter into constructive dialogue with all the partnership agencies involved to bring that about?

Iain Gray: We are already supporting the project. In fact, the Scottish Executive environment and rural affairs department is contributing more than £1 million to the CHARIS food technology centre. I am pleased to say that, only this morning, the Hannah Research Institute received a proof of concept fund award, which will be used to support a study of the preparation of novel milk protein fractions from skim-milk, acid or cheese whey. I am told that that process is likely to be of interest to dairy food, beverage, health care, biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies, so it is fair to say that the work of the Hannah Research Institute is already supported.

I take Mr Scott's point about job losses. Nobody could describe Ayrshire MSPs as either shy or unassuming. At least three of them, including Margaret Jamieson and Irene Oldfather, have already been in touch with me on the matter. As I was plodding through my correspondence the other day, I discovered that Mr Scott himself has already written to me reminding me that my predecessor had agreed to visit Ayrshire to discuss those matters. I am happy to say that I will follow through on the commitment that she made.

Andrew Wilson (Central Scotland) (SNP): I welcome the new minister to his post and wish him more support inside the Cabinet in undertaking his duties than his predecessor had.

Given the central importance of research to the success of the economy in Ayrshire and throughout Scotland, does Mr Gray recognise the fact that one company in Finland, Nokia, invests more in research and development than the entire Scottish economy, public and private? When does he anticipate that the Government's plans for research and development will bridge that gap?

Iain Gray: The point that I have made—perhaps not directly to Mr Wilson, but more or less on the same round of media interviews that we followed throughout the weekend—is that we are absolutely clear that Scotland's future lies in science and skills and in building on research and development.

We have the high-level strategy in place and we must examine what is required to ensure that the pipeline between the ideas and the marketable product is clear. The proof of concept fund is an excellent start and an example of the kind of thing that we must do. One of my priorities will be to consider what else we must do to make the research-based science and skills agenda a reality in the months and years to come.

Ayr United Heathfield Stadium

2. Phil Gallie (South of Scotland) (Con): To ask the Scottish Executive what the current position is on the Ayr United Heathfield stadium planning application in light of the passing of the 4 April deadline it set for the receipt of responses in line with court requirements. (S1O-5139)

The Deputy Minister for Social Justice (Hugh Henry): The six replies that have been received in response to the Scottish ministers' request for parties' views are currently under consideration.

Phil Gallie: I am disappointed that the minister cannot be more positive. Will he advise me what discussions the Executive has had with East Ayrshire Council and Enterprise Ayrshire on the provision of a business retail park in north Kilmarnock? Will he explain to me the differences between having a business retail park in Kilmarnock external to the town centre and having such a business retail park in Ayr, which he opposes?

Hugh Henry: In the couple of days that I have been in post, I have not have had the opportunity to go into all the planning applications that have been considered throughout Ayrshire. [Interruption.] I will get that done by the weekend. [Laughter.] I have no doubt that all the information will be considered properly when we come to make a decision. I am sure that Mr Gallie would not want an over-hasty decision.

Phil Gallie: It has taken 19 months.

The Presiding Officer: Order.

Hugh Henry: I have been in post a matter of days. I am sure that Mr Gallie recalls the criticism that he levelled at the then Minister for Environment, Sport and Culture about the short time that he was in office before the Scottish ministers took the original decision. The process will reflect careful consideration of all the available information. I will consider the matter properly with my colleague Margaret Curran and we will come to a considered conclusion.

Bell Baxter High School

3. Mr Keith Harding (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con): To ask the Scottish Executive what issues the Minister for Education and Young People discussed with staff and board members on her recent visit to Bell Baxter High School, Cupar. (S1O-5161)

The Minister for Education and Young People (Cathy Jamieson): Our discussion focused on the major building work that is under way and that will result in the school being located on one site.

Mr Harding: I will thank the minister for that reply at some time the future. She is aware of the deplorable state of the school at the Westport site and the traffic dangers that face pupils when moving between the two sites. Will the Executive consider a spend-to-save scheme to bring about a single-site school at an earlier date?

Cathy Jamieson: Mr Harding is aware that the matter was the subject of a members' business debate some time ago. He is also aware that a considerable amount of work has been done since then on the proposals to locate the school on one site. At a meeting on 29 April, the council confirmed its continuing commitment to doing that. My understanding is that most of the work that is required will be done in the next year or so. It is hoped to have most of the facilities on one site during 2003.

Iain Smith (North-East Fife) (LD): I thank the minister for fulfilling the commitment to visit Bell Baxter High School that one of her predecessors—Sam Galbraith—made to me. I am sure that, during that visit, she saw the huts and buildings at the Westport site, which are in pretty much the same awful condition that they were in when I started there 30 years ago. Will the minister join me in congratulating the teaching staff and other staff at Bell Baxter High School for continuing to provide a high standard of education despite the appalling conditions in which they work and the problems that are caused by being on a split site? Does she agree that the completion of the project to put the school on a single site is essential to provide the best possible education and safety for the pupils?

Cathy Jamieson: I will reassure Iain Smith, who is the constituency member and who has campaigned on the issue for a number of years. The conditions under which the young people and staff are working are less than tolerable. That is not the quality of school environment in which we want people to learn and work in the 21st century. That is why we are committed to doing what we can to improve the school buildings.

I was pleased to hear about the work that is going on in the school and was impressed by the level of academic achievement and the work that is being done to support young people in the school who have particular difficulties. I commend the staff for working under those difficult conditions.

Race Relations (Amendment) Act 2000 (Education)

4. Jackie Baillie (Dumbarton) (Lab): To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking on the Race Relations (Amendment) Act 2000 as it affects education in schools. (S1O-5180)

The Minister for Education and Young People (Cathy Jamieson): We are working in partnership with the Commission for Racial Equality, the Centre for Education for Racial Equality in Scotland and other relevant organisations to raise awareness of the duties of the Race Relations (Amendment) Act 2000 and to ensure that schools and education authorities are able to carry out their new duties under the act.

Jackie Baillie: The minister will be aware of the view that, in order successfully to promote race equality in schools, a consistent approach to the monitoring of racial incidents across Scotland needs to be taken. At present, some authorities record racial incidents under other categories, such as bullying, so the true extent of the problem remains hidden. Will the minister commit to ensuring consistent monitoring across Scotland in order that we might properly address race equality in all our schools?

Cathy Jamieson: The member will be interested to know that I have met representatives of the Commission for Racial Equality in the past couple of weeks. We considered how to take forward a range of issues to ensure that racism has no place and cannot be tolerated in our education system or in our schools and that we continue to do whatever we can to end it.

From 30 November this year, education authorities will have to comply with certain things. They will be required to have a written policy for promoting race equality and to ensure that that policy is monitored and acted on. Through those measures, I am sure that we will be able to address the significant issues that Jackie Baillie raised.

Dennis Canavan (Falkirk West): Given the need to ensure that Scotland is a modern, multi-cultural, multi-ethnic society, will the minister disassociate the Scottish Executive from the recent comments made by David Blunkett about asylum seekers and immigrants "swamping" schools and medical practices. Such comments are reminiscent of the racist remarks of Margaret Thatcher 20 years ago.

Cathy Jamieson: I am happy to reassure the member that the Scottish Executive will continue to work where it is appropriate to ensure that refugees and asylum seekers are given the services that they require in the relevant local authority areas. We recognise, however, that that is primarily a matter for the United Kingdom Government. I am of course in close contact with my Westminster colleagues on that issue.

Criminal Justice (Crimes with Knives)

5. Alex Neil (Central Scotland) (SNP): To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has plans to review the law in relation to crimes involving knives. (S1O-5142)

The Deputy First Minister and Minister for Justice (Mr Jim Wallace): Scots law has always regarded an attack with an offensive weapon as a serious aggravation of assault. Successive legislation has introduced tighter and more specific controls to tackle the carrying of knives and therefore to help the prevention of crime. A wide range of powers is now in force.

Existing legislation is robust and flexible in responding to the illegal use and carriage of knives. Where new types of offences emerge that are not covered by existing legislation, we are prepared to consider extending the statutory powers available to tackle the threat of violent crime.

Alex Neil: The minister says that the existing law is effective. Is he aware that in the Strathclyde police area during the last three years of the period for which figures are available the incidence of crimes involving knives rose by 46 per cent? Is he aware that the justice department does not centrally collect statistics on the levels of prosecutions, fines and sentences relating to such offences? Will he now review the law, and will his department at least collect the statistics so that we can measure the success—or otherwise—of the existing law?

Mr Wallace: I am aware of the level of offences involving the carrying of knives in Strathclyde. Strathclyde police reported in January that recorded violent crime involving knives had increased substantially between October and the end of December 2001. In that period, 44,185 searches were carried out, resulting in 1,072 people being reported to the procurator fiscal. It is fair to say that that is the success of the spotlight and safer streets initiatives. Strathclyde police force has taken such initiatives to tackle the malaise of young people carrying knives.

I can assure Mr Neil that, because the carrying of a knife is an aggravation of an assault, any assault involving a knife tends to attract a higher penalty when a court sentences a person convicted of such an offence.

Dorothy-Grace Elder (Glasgow) (Ind): I can confirm that Strathclyde police force has been vigorous in acting against crimes involving knives, but it needs more backing from the minister. It is not just the carrying of knives, but the sale of the most aggressive types of knife that is the problem. Panga knives and miniature samurai swords are still sold, for example. Even if they are not overtly marketed as aggressive weapons, people can get away with having them. When they are arrested, some criminals claim that the weapons are simply collectors' pieces. Why not ban all such sorts of knife completely?

Mr Wallace: The Criminal Justice Act 1988 includes a power to ban the manufacture, sale and importation of specified offensive weapons. Fourteen such weapons have been banned in that way including sword-sticks, push daggers, death stars and butterfly knives. As I said earlier, I can assure Dorothy-Grace Elder that, if new problems emerge with specific kinds of knives, we are prepared to extend the categories if necessary. One reason why the law has been reformed on a number of occasions is that the attempt has been made to tighten up on the abuse whereby people carry knives. We are determined to tackle that part of the culture of violence.

National Health Service Boards

6. Mr John McAllion (Dundee East) (Lab): To ask the Scottish Executive when it next intends to review the future of unified national health service boards. (S1O-5173)

The Minister for Health and Community Care (Malcolm Chisholm): Unified NHS Boards were established as recently as September 2001. We do not, therefore, expect to spend the coming months reviewing their future. However, a longer-term review of management and decision-making in NHS Scotland is now under way.

Mr McAllion: The minister will be aware that, during the acute services review, a number of health boards across Scotland simply ignored public opinion and imposed what they believed were unpopular but justified decisions. Given the fact that the minister only becomes involved in such decisions in limited circumstances, such as a hospital closure, has not the time come to introduce a breath of democracy into the running of the NHS? Should not we make those who sit on the boards directly elected and accountable to the Scottish people?

Malcolm Chisholm: Several important developments are relevant to that point. First, with the creation of the new NHS boards, we have extended the range of people on the boards. Secondly, last week we issued new draft guidance on increased public involvement in decisions about local health services. We have a whole agenda around patient focus and public involvement that we are determined to progress quickly so that we have far more effective public involvement. Thirdly, part of the review will be to consider how we can improve the accountability of local health systems to the Parliament and the Executive and to local communities. Those are the areas in which most people think that we should have a more effective engagement with the public.

The reality is that acute services reviews are inherently controversial. Sometimes people in one part of an area will want one solution and people in another part of the area will prefer a different solution. Simply having elected health boards would not get round some of those dilemmas, which any NHS board would face.

David Mundell (South of Scotland) (Con): Does the minister agree that there is no one-size-fits-all solution for the health service in Scotland? Will he give early and favourable consideration to holding a public consultation on Dumfries and Galloway NHS Board's innovative proposals for a single integrated health service organisation?

Malcolm Chisholm: Clearly, I have already given approval for the developments that are taking place in Dumfries and Galloway and we will all take a keen interest in what is happening. That is exactly the kind of model that the continuing longer-term review will want to consider. However, the fundamental message from us—and, I believe, from the public—is that we do not want structural upheaval and top-down imposition. We want to ensure that we involve patients and front-line staff in leading change. That is the centre of our reform agenda.

Mr Keith Raffan (Mid Scotland and Fife) (LD): I agree with the minister that the last thing that we need is permanent upheaval. Does he agree that the existing structure must be allowed to settle down?

In view of the increasing drugs bill—£5 million in Tayside this year, over £4 million in Fife, and similar experiences in all health boards throughout Scotland—will the minister consider the proposal that has been made by some health board chief executives about the central funding of the drugs bill? That proposal, which has been made because of the high increases, might avoid an increase in postcode prescribing.

Malcolm Chisholm: At the moment, the drugs bills are part of the general allocations to boards. That fact was welcomed during our very positive debate on primary care two weeks ago because that allows connections to be made between the drugs budget and other developments in primary care. I do not think that there would be widespread support for the proposal that Mr Raffan mentions, but I will consider it further if it is a definite suggestion.

Child Poverty

7. Mr Kenneth Gibson (Glasgow) (SNP): To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking in order to reduce child poverty. (S1O-5165)

The Minister for Social Justice (Ms Margaret Curran): We are taking steps to tackle the causes of child poverty through our early intervention policies to ensure that every child has the best start in life. We are also taking steps to reduce child poverty by giving parents real opportunities to increase their incomes. We are getting more parents into work through support for new deal programmes, by providing affordable child care and by supporting education and training programmes. That is underpinned by the work of the UK Government, which is modernising the tax and benefits systems to make work pay.

Mr Gibson: I thank the new Minister for Social Justice for her reply. Will she explain why, given that the Executive uses the same definition of poverty as do other European Union nations, child poverty stands at a scandalous 30 per cent in Scotland, which is an increase on last year? That compares with 2 per cent in Sweden, 4.5 per cent in Denmark and 8.3 per cent in Finland. Our figure is higher than that of any other EU nation. Will the minister concede that unless the Parliament gains the fiscal clout that is needed to eliminate child poverty, the Executive will remain powerless to ensure that every Scottish child grows up in a poverty-free environment?

Ms Curran: Kenny Gibson asked several questions to which I can give detailed answers, but I will begin with his last point. I have heard nothing from the SNP that could challenge the work on child poverty that the UK Government, the Prime Minister and the Chancellor of the Exchequer and the Executive do.

I will deal with Kenny Gibson's statistics, because an important point in the child poverty debate must be understood. From 1996 to 1997, the figure fell from 34 per cent to 30 per cent—Kenny Gibson referred to that figure. However, he did not draw out two points that should be understood. The gap is in the context of rising incomes. Incomes in Britain have risen by 13 per cent since 1997. That context explains why we still have a gap.

We are making even greater progress with the poorest children and the figure has fallen by another 5 per cent. The absolute figures have shown a 13 per cent fall since 1997. In absolute terms, we are making real progress. We are benefiting all Scotland, but we acknowledge the gap. We will take determined action to tackle child poverty.

Karen Whitefield (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab): Does the minister agree that, in tackling poverty, it is not enough to improve family income alone? We must also widen the opportunities that are open to families. Will she tell us the Executive's proposals for doing that?

Ms Curran: Child poverty is not just about a lack of income. The grip of poverty is so severe that it shows itself in other places. That is why we have invested £1.6 billion in housing in Glasgow to begin to tackle dampness, which affects people who are in poverty. That is why we have record levels of investment in the health service, because poverty affects health. That is why literacy and numeracy are part of our four key educational priorities. We have taken decisive action on several fronts to tackle poverty.

Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh (Central Scotland) (Con): Would not it be more beneficial to seek to reverse Gordon Brown's decision to increase employers' national insurance contributions to allow businesses to grow and to employ more people, which would have the knock-on effect of reducing child poverty?

Ms Curran: No. That would be inappropriate. We are working in partnership with the UK Government on the working families tax credit, the new child tax credit, the minimum wage and we are taking action on several fronts. We are taking action on the absolute number of children in poverty. Child benefit is being increased. We are turning the situation around and reducing the gap. We will continue to reduce the gap through the chancellor's work and the Executive's work.

Tommy Sheridan (Glasgow) (SSP): Given that the rate of reduction of child poverty is woefully unacceptable—I hope that the minister has the honesty and integrity to accept that—will the minister join me in condemning the suggestion from Tony Blair's office that the child benefit of families whose children are apparently or allegedly persistent offenders should be cut? Does she reject that idea as completely and utterly unacceptable?

Ms Curran: Mr Sheridan has pre-empted a question that I am to be asked later, but I will be happy to deal with the matter later, too.

No one in the Executive will be satisfied while any children live in poverty. I give my absolute commitment as the new Minister for Social Justice that that will be one of my top priorities. It is absurd to dismiss all that the Executive does, all the action that it has taken and all the improvements that it has made, but that does not mean that we are complacent about the existing numbers.

I understand that we have no firm proposal on the idea that is in the media. I do not know how we would pursue the matter. We will need to see proposals.

European Union (Scottish Representation)

8. Michael Russell (South of Scotland) (SNP): To ask the Scottish Executive how it will be represented at the meeting of education ministers from European Union countries and applicant states, which is to be held in Bratislava in June. (S1O-5137)

The Minister for Education and Young People (Cathy Jamieson): At the Bratislava conference of European ministers, the interests of all parts of the United Kingdom will be represented by the UK delegation, which will comprise the Minister of State for Lifelong Learning and Higher Education and the Minister for Employment and Learning in Northern Ireland.

Michael Russell: Perhaps the minister could remind the delegation that Scotland has a different educational system. The minister could also get out a bit more—for example, she could learn from a delegation from the parliament in Bremen, which is visiting the Scottish Parliament today. The delegation is here to look at the experience of Scotland and the European city of culture work that has been undertaken in Glasgow. Would the minister not find it appropriate to go to Europe to talk and learn about education, rather than to be spoken for?

Cathy Jamieson: Once again the SNP has embarked on its usual rant and is attempting to make a constitutional issue out of children's education. It is absolutely clear that the Scottish Executive has an input into all the delegations that go to Europe. In the past, the delegation has included members of the Scottish Executive and I have no doubt that it will include Scottish Executive members in the future. I receive regular updates and am in regular contact.

I am delighted to be out and about in Scottish schools, finding out about the good work that is going on. I work with my colleagues to make continual improvements to the standard of education in Scotland.

Murdo Fraser (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con): At any future meeting of European education ministers that the minister might attend, will she take the opportunity to discuss with the Danish education minister the scheme that operates in Denmark, whereby any group of parents can come together to establish a school, which—provided that there is a minimum of 28 pupils—receives state funding? Would the minister consider a pilot scheme for Scotland along those lines?

Cathy Jamieson: I am interested to hear of any initiatives that are taking place in Europe, or in other parts of the world, which would help us to examine the future of education in Scotland. That is why we launched the national debate. I am sure that various people will submit their views in the course of that debate.

Irene Oldfather (Cunninghame South) (Lab): Does the minister agree that the role of our young people is central to the European education agenda? Will she join me in welcoming the hundreds of schoolchildren who have attended the Parliament today to celebrate Europe day? Does the minister agree that by involving our young people in our work, the Scottish Parliament can play an important role in promoting Scotland in Europe and in promoting Europe in Scotland?

Cathy Jamieson: I am delighted to welcome the young people who are here. I commend the Parliament's European Committee on its initiative. I am particularly delighted to welcome the young people from Ardeer Primary School, which is my local primary school and which provided my son with a good education. Such initiatives will produce young people who are interested not just in the Scottish Parliament, but in world affairs. We will be able to leave Scotland in their hands in the future.

Supervision Costs

9. Brian Adam (North-East Scotland) (SNP): To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any plans to recover the supervision costs in respect of Steven Beech from the appropriate authorities in England. (S1O-5151)

The Deputy First Minister and Minister for Justice (Mr Jim Wallace): The overriding consideration in such cases must be the protection of the public and I am satisfied that the arrangements that have been put in place are robust. That consideration underpins the reciprocal agreement on the cross-border flows of offenders that applies in the present circumstances. Our view is that Scotland does well out of the current funding arrangements and there are no plans to change them.

Brian Adam: Is the minister satisfied with the appropriateness of an arrangement that allowed Cambridgeshire police to export the problem of Steven Beech to Scotland for the sum of £80, as a result of which costs were incurred that allegedly reached £200,000? I am disappointed that the minister thinks that the current arrangements are appropriate. There must be scope for further discussion with the minister's colleagues south of the border about how we deal with persistent sex offenders.

Mr Wallace: It was not a case of Cambridgeshire police exporting anyone. Steven Beech is not subject to any statutory supervision requirement and is therefore free to reside wherever he chooses in the United Kingdom. It is fair to point out that in accompanying Steven Beech on his journey to Aberdeen, Cambridgeshire police acted in the best interests of public safety.

The immediate response in Grampian of the taking out of an appropriate order in Aberdeen sheriff court was also an appropriate response. The protection of the public is the important consideration. I am satisfied that the Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire authorities and the Scottish Executive have acted properly in discharging our responsibility to look after the safety of the public.

As I indicated—although perhaps Mr Adam was not listening—there are cross-border flows and when an offender in similar circumstances goes south of the border, the Scottish Executive does not pick up the tab. In our assessment, the reciprocal arrangement is working well.

I would be interested to learn whether the policy of Mr Adam and his party was that we should have done nothing to address the interests of public safety that arose when Steven Beech came to Aberdeen.

VisitScotland (Meetings)

10. Ian Jenkins (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD): To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met VisitScotland and what issues were discussed. (S1O-5163)

The Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport (Mike Watson): I meet regularly with representatives from VisitScotland to discuss various issues relating to Scottish tourism. I last met the chief executive at the Confederation of Passenger Transport conference on 2 May.

Ian Jenkins: What resources were made available to VisitScotland to help the tourism industry to recover from the crisis caused by foot-and-mouth disease? When the minister next meets representatives of VisitScotland, will he urge them—when they distribute their funding, whether directly or through targeted project funding—to recognise the impact that the disease has had, and continues to have, on the Scottish Borders Tourist Board and Dumfries and Galloway Tourist Board areas?

Mike Watson: The Executive made a considerable amount of money—about £11 million—available to VisitScotland as a result of the foot-and-mouth crisis. In the current year, we are making £4 million available and there will be a further £3 million next year. That money is for VisitScotland to distribute as it sees fit. I understand that, following representations from the Scottish Borders and Dumfries and Galloway tourist boards, VisitScotland is in discussion with the boards on how the money should be disbursed.

Rhona Brankin (Midlothian) (Lab): In the context of the golf tourism strategy, will VisitScotland support the Scottish women's open golf championship?

Mike Watson: That issue is being considered. We are putting together a new major event strategy—with professional advice from a company called Objective Performance Ltd—which I announced in the chamber during the debate on tourism on 27 March. No decision on the Scottish women's championship has yet been made, but I will bear in mind what Mrs Brankin has said. If she wants to make separate representations to me on the issue, they will be welcome.

Mr Kenny MacAskill (Lothians) (SNP): The minister will be aware of the discord within the golf sector over the eTourism joint venture partnership. Will the minister confirm that VisitScotland was not given any opportunity to consider any scheme other than a public-private partnership? Why was it forced to go down the route of a PPP scheme when that does not necessarily represent best value?

Mike Watson: It is not true to say that VisitScotland was forced to go down that route. The issue was mapped out in the tourism strategy that was published in February 2000. Discussions with SchlumbergerSema, the company involved in the joint venture partnership, have taken place on that basis ever since.

I had a meeting with VisitScotland's golf promotions unit this week. On Sunday, I am meeting representatives of a golf promotions agency to hear their concerns. Everybody across Scotland who is involved in the joint venture partnership in tourism will benefit from the new website when it is established later this year. Many if not all of the problems that have been raised with me have been dealt with. The Scottish Tourism Forum, having considered those problems, has issued a statement fully backing the partnership.

Special Educational Needs

11. Rhoda Grant (Highlands and Islands) (Lab): To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has identified any benefits from awards made by the special educational needs innovation grants programme and how it intends to recognise and promote good practice in the education of children and young people with special educational needs. (S1O-5158)

The Minister for Education and Young People (Cathy Jamieson): The SEN innovation grants programme has funded over 80 projects across the SEN spectrum. These have promoted good practice and delivered benefits through improving access to the curriculum, providing advice and support for children and families and producing SEN resource materials for schools.

I recently announced funding worth £5 million for a further 42 projects from April 2002. Those projects will promote positive partnerships between local authorities and the voluntary sector, help to develop inclusive practice in schools and assist children and young people with SEN, and their families, to be involved in the decisions that affect them.

Rhoda Grant: The minister will be aware of my concerns about the education of children and young people with autism. Will she undertake to ensure that SEN training for teachers in mainstream education is available and accessible so that they can better understand the needs of children with autism? Can she indicate how readily available to staff such training provision will be so that education is geared towards the needs of the child?

Cathy Jamieson: I am aware of the member's interest in autism. I am pleased to say that, as part of the announcements that were made, a total of £697,000 has been used to develop autism services. The National Autistic Society is running a project to examine training for professionals working in autistic spectrum disorders. The project will review the current training provision in Scotland, identify the gaps and develop a targeted national training framework. That project is in addition to the work that is already going on in schools throughout Scotland.

Mr Brian Monteith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con): Can the minister say where the Scottish Executive stands in relation to its policy to withdraw direct financial support to grant-aided special needs schools? Will she give a commitment that a decision on that will be taken before May 2003?

Cathy Jamieson: I am pleased to say that I can give the member information about where the Executive stands in relation to that issue. On taking up my post, I stated my wish to consider the proposals in detail. I am currently considering a report on those proposals. Information will be conveyed to the schools as quickly as possible. However, I want to have face-to-face discussions with the schools to ensure that we make the correct decision.

Mr Duncan Hamilton (Highlands and Islands) (SNP): Is the minister aware of the fears of the Dyspraxia Foundation and those working in developmental co-ordination disorders that such conditions are often ignored? Will she tell us how many of the grants that have been made went to projects in that field? Will she outline—either today or by letter if that is more appropriate—the Executive's strategy on dyspraxia, which affects children and their families?

Cathy Jamieson: I am well aware that Duncan Hamilton has taken a particular interest in dyspraxia. We have already taken steps to ensure that dyspraxia is addressed. We have produced a teacher's pack jointly with the Dyspraxia Foundation and we have held a training event for staff working with pupils with dyspraxia. I will provide the member with further detailed information on all the grants that have been made available and how they will affect those with dyspraxia.

Child Benefit (Truancy)

12. Robert Brown (Glasgow) (LD): To ask the Scottish Executive—with a sense of déjà vu—what impact any plans by Her Majesty's Government to cut child benefit for the parents of truants will have on child poverty. (S1O-5169)

The Minister for Social Justice (Ms Margaret Curran): I understand that the matter is being considered by the UK Government but that, as yet, there is no firm proposal. We will monitor developments carefully.

Robert Brown: Does the minister agree that populist solutions to complex problems are no substitute for tackling the root causes of truancy and child poverty, whether they are peddled by the Prime Minister or even the SNP, which occasionally decides to muddy the waters? Does she agree that targeted action to support individual families and children with problems is required? Can she say whether ministers are making any progress in ensuring that education authorities make speedy and effective educational provision for excluded children?

Ms Curran: Robert Brown makes some interesting points. I note that he referred to populist action, but we must be careful that we take popular action—we must listen to what communities tell us and be prepared to take decisive action. The poverty agenda is linked intrinsically to tackling crime. Poorer communities suffer disproportionately from crime and we must take action on their behalf.

We must also recognise that we will not serve the interests of vulnerable young people at all well if we do not take decisive action on truancy. Universal compulsory education is one of the great advantages of our society and is in the best interests of children. We should never collude with anything that implies something other than that. That is not to say that we cannot develop preventive measures and take comprehensive interventionist measures across education and social work to assist young people who may be slipping into trouble. We must be clear that sanctions may be appropriate at times, although they should not cut across child poverty measures. However, we must be prepared to consider all the options.

Brian Fitzpatrick (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab): Will the minister join me in recognising the serious concerns of communities across Scotland about issues of public disorder, including youth disorder? Will she reflect on the fact that the main victims of youth disorder are other young people? Will she confirm that the Scottish Executive will consider any proposals, including financial sanctions, to protect communities from disorder?

Ms Curran: I re-emphasise that we would not do anything that we thought would cut across our child poverty measures, but we must take decisive action to tackle youth crime. As many people—Glasgow MSPs in particular—know, youth crime is a serious issue that we must tackle. Young people will be helped if we take action on youth crime. Brian Fitzpatrick is right to highlight that issue in the Parliament.

First Minister's Question Time

Cabinet (Meetings)

1. Mr John Swinney (North Tayside) (SNP): To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S1F-1879)

The First Minister (Mr Jack McConnell): Next week, the Cabinet will discuss our programme of record investment in schools, hospitals, roads, courts and other public services.

Mr Swinney: On 31 March, Wendy Alexander said:

"I love my job. I'm committed to it."

Five weeks later, she resigned. What did the First Minister do to her?

The First Minister: First, Wendy Alexander did love her job, and she did it very well. Secondly, her reasons for resigning were spelled out clearly in her letter to me of last Friday morning.

Mr Swinney: That is all very well, but is not the real reason why Wendy Alexander resigned the fact that the First Minister overloaded her because she was not one of his cronies? Is the First Minister aware that his decision to create an enterprise, transport and lifelong learning post was described by a board member of Scottish Enterprise—Mr Ian Ritchie, who is one of the most respected businessmen in Scotland—as "completely and utterly barmy"? As a result, in a week of record business failures—with 240 businesses lost in Scotland so far this year—Wendy Alexander told The Herald: that she

"can't get the growth issue on the agenda"

of the Cabinet. Is not it the case that the First Minister is more interested in settling old scores than in governing for the people of Scotland?

The First Minister: First, there are serious inaccuracies in that question. The leader of the nationalist party should refrain from inaccurately quoting anyone in this chamber, never mind an ex-minister of the Government.

Secondly, it is also wrong for the leader of the nationalist party to run down Scotland quite so much. There are figures that might have been entirely predictable as a result of last year's downturn in the electronics, farming and tourism industries, and because of difficulties in other sectors. Yesterday's figures on some business failures in Scotland might have been entirely predictable, but there have also recently been record figures for business start-ups in Scotland. There have also been much better growth figures than were predicted by the nationalist party, which has been trying to run down Scotland into a recession for the past 12 months.

The strategy "A Smart, Successful Scotland" was championed by Wendy Alexander and supported by two Cabinets—the previous Cabinet and the current Cabinet—and is being applied consistently with the support of businesses and other organisations in Scotland. Last Monday night, Wendy Alexander and I met a number of senior managing directors, chief executives and chairs of companies who support that strategy. They said, above all, "Don't change the strategy. Keep it going. Make sure that we build a better Scotland tomorrow." Those people are right. The strategy is right. We intend to continue with it. All MSPs in the partnership on the coalition benches are committed to supporting that strategy in the years ahead.

Mr Swinney: That would all be very well if the Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning had not decided to resign within the past seven days and question the whole direction of the Government. I remind the First Minister of some of his own words. He described Wendy Alexander as a minister with "commitment and expertise". What makes someone with commitment and expertise act in the manner that she did? Why did she decide to resign, then conceal that information for four months? Why did she make it public in a way that was so damaging to the Executive? Is it because Wendy Alexander is a uniquely spiteful person, or is it because she knows that there is something rotten at the heart of the McConnell Government? Is not it because she knows that the First Minister is a man who is more interested in operating like a cynical machine politician than he is in governing in the interests of everyone in Scotland?

The First Minister: Mr Swinney cannot hide the fact that he does not have an economics strategy behind that kind of abuse.

We have a strategy in Scotland to build the sort of smart, successful Scotland that will ensure that Scotland's growth rate rises in the way that it should in the years to come. The strategy involves boosting Scottish companies to ensure that they receive from public agencies the capital funds and back-up that they should have had a long time ago. The strategy involves ensuring that Scots have the training, development and skills to help them to cope and succeed in the 21st century. With 20,000 modern apprentices and over 50 per cent of our young people going into further and higher education, the strategy is on course.

This week, we launched the new science advisory committee, which will ensure that Scottish science and laboratories are up to date and that Scottish science is out there working in the economic community. In the past year, we launched Scottish Development International to promote Scottish products internationally. In recent weeks, we have seen chambers of commerce and others praise the new business start-up strategy of Scottish Enterprise and the Executive. Chambers of commerce and others have said that the strategy is exactly what Scotland has needed for a very, very long time.

Politicians jobs are not important; we are elected for a four-year term to carry out a job. Other people's jobs are important. Every member of the Cabinet and, I hope, everyone in the chamber, has a difficult job to do. However, the people who have the really difficult jobs to do are those who work on night shifts throughout Scotland, who earn minimum wages and must try to feed their families. Our job in the Scottish Parliament is to ensure that their jobs are more secure and better in the years to come. That is what we will set about doing.

Cathie Craigie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab): The First Minister might not be aware of the fact that last Friday, when other things were happening, business people gathered in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth to celebrate the 100th new business start-up in the area. Despite what other members are saying, will the First Minister note that business people in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth view the linking of transport, enterprise and lifelong learning as important to their businesses and to the future of the Scottish economy?

The First Minister: For months before I created the position, SNP members were calling for the Executive to link transport and enterprise more closely. I agree entirely with Cathie Craigie. We must ensure that Scottish businesses that are starting and that are trying to build up and develop their products, markets or workforce have the support—not the interference—of this Government, to help them to grow and grow and grow. Those businesses need more than anything a stable policy and economy that will allow them to predict the future. The biggest challenge to those companies' stability is not changes of Executive ministers; rather it is the taking of Scotland out of the single market and the United Kingdom. We need to support Scottish businesses, not provide them with threats for the future, and that is exactly what we will do.

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): Question 2 has been withdrawn.

McCrone Agreement

3. Cathy Peattie (Falkirk East) (Lab): To ask the First Minister whether the implementation of the McCrone agreement is proceeding satisfactorily. (S1F-1893)

The First Minister (Mr Jack McConnell): Yes. Good progress continues to be made with the implementation of the agreement. The agreement is for the long term and has a completion date of August 2006. Successful implementation requires cultural change throughout the education service. The combination of investment and reform is already making a difference throughout Scotland.

Cathy Peattie: Can the First Minister give some assurance that all probationer teachers, including last year's probationers, will complete their probation?

The First Minister: I suspect that I need to cover three different categories of probationer in the answer to that question. There are those who, because they have recently graduated, will start their probation this year. The guarantee for them is that the new probationary system will work to secure them a place in a school, with a proper contract to go with that. They will complete their probation on time. Others are on the current two-year probationary period.

One of the great tragedies in education over the past decade is that a large number of young people and others have had to carry out their probation over four, five and sometimes six years in a variety of schools and at a variety of times. Others will have done a bit of their probation, but they will not have finished it. The agreement allowed for a subsequent agreement to ensure that those probationers get a special arrangement. I understand that that special arrangement is almost in place. It will involve those young people and others not having to complete the full two years, but having to see through some other conditions in the new agreement in order to complete a reduced time period.

Michael Russell (South of Scotland) (SNP): I thank the First Minister for that assurance. However, people who are presently working on probationary contracts have been told that they will lose their posts so that new teachers can be brought in during the induction year. I would like to ask again the question that I think Cathy Peattie asked. Is there a guarantee that those individuals will be allowed to finish their probationary period and qualify instead of being turfed out to make room for teachers on the induction scheme? It would be absolutely wrong for them to be turfed out.

The First Minister: I thank Mr Russell for thanking me for my first answer. Indeed, I hope that he heard what I said, because I made it clear that we have been involved in discussions to secure that very agreement, to ensure that local authorities can deliver it in schools, and to ensure that Executive and local authority funds are available so that the agreement's implementation can be properly seen through. We understand that that agreement is almost in place. When it is, members will be the first to know.

Mr Brian Monteith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con): The First Minister said that implementation of the McCrone agreement is satisfactory. Surely he is aware that in the Labour-controlled East Lothian Council, £306,000 of the £512,000 that was delivered to implement McCrone has been diverted to another budget. Given the circumstances in East Lothian and in other local authorities that say that they do not have enough money, would it be helpful to meet the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and review the delivery of finance to support McCrone?

The First Minister: I am grateful to Mr Monteith for asking that question, because it gives me an opportunity to clarify the current position. As he knows, the deal that was reached early last year was never only about teachers' pay. It also involved significant change to and modernisation of the education service. That includes: decentralised, more flexible and streamlined management; a new probationary and training system for teachers throughout their lives; new standards and a new system of teacher discipline to ensure that those who cannot teach any more are no longer in the classroom; a new system to supply more support staff to reduce bureaucracy for teachers; a significant increase in teachers' hours; and new flexibility in our schools. The agreement is being delivered in all those areas. I checked this morning and found that the negotiating team has not missed one deadline in securing implementation of the agreement. Local agreements between management and teachers unions are now in place in all the 2,900 to 3,000 schools in Scotland, which will ensure the decentralisation of the work and conditions of service and the flexibility of contracts that are so essential for the cultural change in the profession.

I am sure that East Lothian Council can explain its situation for itself. Indeed, Cathy Jamieson and I were very keen to hear about the position there and were both reassured this morning that that council has not missed one deadline and is on track to deliver the agreement. It is absolutely convinced that it will implement every element that it is required to implement. I assure Brian Monteith that I, Cathy Jamieson, the whole Executive and the local authorities and teaching unions at national level are all committed to ensuring that everyone complies and that the whole agreement brings about the revitalisation of Scottish education that it was designed to achieve.

Mr John Home Robertson (East Lothian) (Lab): From his visit to my constituency in January, the First Minister will recall that East Lothian Council is taking enormous strides in raising educational standards through annual education budget increases that average 9.7 per cent over the past five years and through a £35 million public-private partnership to upgrade all the high schools in the county. Although I am grateful for his acknowledgement of the council's unequivocal commitment to the McCrone agreement, will he further acknowledge the council's close partnership with the teaching profession locally? Furthermore, does he agree that it is right and proper that services that are provided for children by different local authority departments should be fully co-ordinated, notwithstanding last night's hatchet job by BBC's "Newsnight Scotland" programme?

The First Minister: I do not wish to comment on any television programme: if I started doing so, I could be here all day. As everyone knows, the agreement was very important for Scottish education. It is vital not only that it is applied consistently throughout Scotland, but that it delivers the flexibility in our schools that will revitalise professionalism and improve teaching.

I know the quality of education in East Lothian. Indeed, I have sometimes been jealous when I visited some of the very high-quality schools in the area. One of the main reasons why a large number of people work in Edinburgh and live in East Lothian is that they have the opportunity of sending their children to some of those high-quality schools. I hope that East Lothian Council is aware of the concerns that have been expressed in the past 24 hours and that it will do all that it can to reassure local parents that the agreement is being implemented in East Lothian, just as it is being implemented everywhere else.

"A Smart, Successful Scotland"

4. Miss Annabel Goldie (West of Scotland) (Con): I should mention that my colleague Mr McLetchie regrets that he cannot be in the chamber. Sadly, he is dealing with the bereavement of a close personal friend.

I want to ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive's vision of "A Smart, Successful Scotland: Ambitions for the Enterprise Networks" will be affected by the resignation of Ms Wendy Alexander as Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning. (S1F-1891)

The First Minister (Mr Jack McConnell): I thank David McLetchie for giving advance notice that he would not be here this afternoon.

In reply to Annabel Goldie's question, I say no. "A Smart Successful Scotland" remains central to our vision for Scotland. We will continue to work with the business community and others to secure higher growth rates and sustainable levels of high employment for Scotland.

Miss Goldie: I thank the First Minister for his response although, unfortunately, given where it comes from, it has all the ringing conviction of me expressing a desire to enter the Miss World contest. As an aspiration, that might fair take the breath away, but as an implementable strategy, it is utterly incapable of attainment. However, unlike the Scottish Executive, I know my limitations.

Will the First Minister explain how his intended implementation of "A Smart, Successful Scotland" will reverse the fragile state of Scotland's economy, given that since publication of the vision 15 months ago, business start-ups are, sadly, at an all-time low, the Scottish economy lags behind the rest of the United Kingdom and company failures have soared since the end of 2001?

The First Minister: I will resist the temptation to respond to the earlier part of Miss Goldie's question. [MEMBERS: "Go on."] Obviously I resist at the risk of seriously disappointing members.

It is important to recognise two things. First, members all know—anyone who denied this would be a fool—that last year was particularly difficult for the Scottish economy, especially in relation to agriculture, tourism and electronics, although other sectors were affected. It is important that we grow out of that difficult year and ensure that Scotland is stronger as a result. We must ensure that, in the long term, Scottish growth rates are higher, Scottish employment is more sustainable and that Scotland has the kind of culture in which people are prepared to take risks.

Secondly, if we want more business start-ups and we want our young people and other people who have to change employment to take more of a risk and have a go at starting businesses, coverage such as is given to those who fail in that enterprise is unhelpful. We must ensure that in Scotland we have a culture that encourages people to be confident enough to set up their own businesses. If they do that and we support them, they will sometimes fail, but when they get it right our economy and society will be stronger as a result.

Miss Goldie: I applaud the First Minister's sentiments and agree that we should encourage such a culture. The difficult question that confronts the First Minister is whether the business community has confidence in his Executive to achieve that. Is the First Minister prepared to take real action by restoring the uniform business rate, reducing business regulation and effecting immediate investment in transport infrastructure, which would at least be an indication that the First Minister is capable of doing something better?

The First Minister: The uniform business rate is, quite correctly, pegged at the rate of inflation and we should maintain that position. We invest in—and we plan to increase investment in—the transport infrastructure. We do not have a direct role in some of the taxation and employment bureaucracy with which firms must deal, but the Chancellor of the Exchequer dealt with many of those matters in his recent budget. I did not hear Annabel Goldie welcoming that, but I am sure that she did, then and today. We are doing what we can to ensure that there is minimal regulation, but we must be honest and say that sometimes regulation is right. For example, it is right and proper to regulate on health and safety matters to ensure that all firms look after their employees and their own interests in the longer term.

It is possible to ensure that we have successful companies in Scotland. It is important that we do not give the impression, either here or abroad, that that is not possible. It is possible to support companies that have been in Scotland for a long time, such as Rolls-Royce, which operates in the high-quality end of the market and produces a product that can be sold overseas. In recent weeks, we have announced that we are going to do that. It is also important that we attract smaller companies from abroad, such as Vestas. On Monday, I visited Vestas-Celtic Wind Technology Ltd in Kintyre. The company is creating high-quality jobs in that disadvantaged rural community and it is providing long-term stability that will make a difference. Those are positives in the Scottish economy. Let us talk them up instead of talking Scotland down.

Mrs Margaret Smith (Edinburgh West) (LD): Following yesterday's announcement of the closure of the Grampian Country Foods chicken processing factory at Newbridge, with the loss of 547 jobs, will the First Minister outline what actions the Executive will take with local agencies to secure alternative employment for the work force in an area that has already been hit by job losses at Continental Tyres, Grampian Foods and Motorola?

The First Minister: I express my regret at the announcement of that closure and my concern—which I am sure is felt by all members—for the people who worked there and who will have to find alternative employment. Our immediate task is to ensure that they have full support in that endeavour. Executive officials are meeting the company at this very moment and will meet the trade unions soon. The normal, successful arrangements—the partnership action for continuing employment strategy—will be put in place early to secure the advice for the work force that will, I hope, give them the new opportunities that they need.

The Presiding Officer: That concludes question time.

Mr Kenneth Gibson (Glasgow) (SNP): On a point of order. I do not think that the Procedure Committee at Westminster would be very impressed by the fact that, although six questions were lodged and in spite of the unfortunate absence of the Conservative leader, we got through only three questions in 20 minutes. My colleague, Gil Paterson, had a very important question to ask. I suggest—as other members have suggested—that you should reconsider the time that is allocated to questions at First Minister's question time.

The Presiding Officer: I have some good news for members. When we move to Aberdeen, a slightly longer period will be allowed for questions. We will see how that goes. I also say—looking generally at ministers—that it would be helpful if we had shorter answers as well as shorter questions. They are full of good material, no doubt, but they could be crisper.

Nurses

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): The next item of business is a debate on motion S1M-3078, in the name of Malcolm Chisholm, on action to recruit, retain and value nurses, and two amendments to that motion.

15:33

The Minister for Health and Community Care (Malcolm Chisholm): The delivery of health services for patients requires a combination of sustained investment and reform—investment in staff, equipment, facilities and new treatments, and reform of ways of working and service organisation in collaboration with patients and front-line staff. Often, in recent weeks, I have seen and read commentators suggest that investing in capacity and investing in reform are two alternative strategies for improving the national health service. Investing in staff has even been portrayed as investing in a bottomless pit that would leave few resources over for reform. That is nonsense. At the heart of that nonsense is a real misunderstanding of what we mean by reform in the NHS. I shall say more about that in next week's debate.

Investing in staff is central to investing in reform. Front-line staff know their patients best; they know what their patients want and how they could make changes to improve their patients' experience. The key to reform is allowing them to do that. By "them", I refer to the whole health care team, and I thank and pay tribute to the invaluable contribution of every member of that team.

However, this is international nurses' week. Nurses and midwives are central to the delivery and reform of both health care and health improvement. The central message to nurses from today's debate is, "We value you and we will seek to value you more and more in the weeks and months to come." There is no doubt that we need many more nurses in the NHS. Since 1997, there has been a rising trend in the number of qualifying nurses. I hope that that trend will continue when new national work force statistics are announced tomorrow. However, we must step up our efforts and ensure that we listen and respond to the needs of the thousands of nurses already working within the NHS.

That is why it has been so important to me to meet hundreds of nurses at the national convention that we held last November and at the six local conventions that we have held throughout Scotland during the past two months. That is why it is so important to me to continue to talk to nurses throughout Scotland. In the past few weeks, I have met emergency nurse practitioners in Aberdeen; nurse endoscopists in Ayr; infection control nurses in the Borders; sexual health nurses in Edinburgh; nurses working with the homeless in Perth; and nurses on medical wards, surgical wards and in primary care throughout Scotland.

Tomorrow, in Inverness, I will have the privilege of joining others to celebrate the success of Scotland's first 11 family health nurses. That is an example of partnership at an international level, as the World Health Organisation is helping to test the delivery of a new model of care, which incorporates disease prevention and health promotion as well as caring for those who are ill. That offers exciting potential for the development of community health services in Scotland.

Following the national nursing convention in November, we drew up an action plan called facing the future, which is based entirely on views that were expressed at the convention. We established a strong national implementation group, called partnership in action, which I am honoured to chair. At the November convention, we announced £1.5 million for recruitment and retention initiatives. That was increased to £5 million at the first local convention in Glasgow at the end of February. At the Glasgow convention, I also announced the immediate funding of six return-to-practice schemes, which will enable 150 nurses to return to work in NHS Scotland. The funding will cover costs, expenses and child care; 60 of those nurse returners are already in place.

We are aware of the need to repair the damage that was done by previous short-sighted decisions to cut student nurse intakes; those are the life-blood of future supply. We have driven up student intakes; 10,000 more nurses will qualify in Scotland by 2005, which is 1,500 more than previously planned. As part of the facing the future initiative, I have increased intakes yet further. There will be another 250 extra students in this academic year. We have increased student bursaries by 10.4 per cent and there will be a further increase later this year.

Tommy Sheridan (Glasgow) (SSP): Will Malcolm Chisholm give way?

Malcolm Chisholm: In a moment. I need to make more progress first.

We want all those who qualify to secure employment within NHS Scotland, if they wish to do so. We have therefore announced that we will guarantee a year's employment on qualification, from autumn 2002. There are potentially 1,500 newly qualified nurses due to graduate across Scotland by October; they will be the first to benefit from that guarantee. The most noticeable recruitment difficulties for nursing and midwifery are in certain specialities and geographic locations. We know that those difficulties could be addressed largely by a more sophisticated approach to work force planning. In January, the Executive issued a consultation paper on our proposals for new work force development centres, as part of our positive response to the report of the Scottish integrated work force planning group, which is mentioned in the Scottish National Party's amendment. Of course, we are supporting that report and carrying forward its recommendations.

The centres will establish work force plans based on solid research and will deliver integrated work force planning, effective recruitment activity and better collaboration throughout the service. That is a central part of our wider work force planning strategy, which is now centre stage for us. A fundamental part of improved work force planning must be a better understanding of nurse work loads. I have announced plans to establish a group to undertake a thorough study of nurse and midwifery work loads, which will ensure that future work force planning is well informed and that the developing role of nurses is not accompanied by an ever-expanding work load.

Tommy Sheridan: My question relates specifically to nurses' bursaries. Given his experience of speaking at various conferences, the minister will surely accept that the biggest deterrent to recruitment of nurses is the level of remuneration and the penalties that young nurses face when trying to qualify. Ten per cent of very little is still quite little. Will the minister today commit himself to considering further increases to nurses' bursaries?

Malcolm Chisholm: There will be a further increase in bursaries this year. I am aware of the issue that Tommy Sheridan raises, and I am sure that it will come up at the special convention for student nurses that we will hold in June.

As well as improving recruitment and increasing future supply, we are delivering other improvements that will help to retain nurses and midwives in the service. We have doubled the number of nurses who will participate in leadership programmes, to ensure that every health board in Scotland will have nurses trained in clinical leadership who can provide effective leadership in clinical teams.

Our introduction of nurse consultants not only improves nurse career prospects, but ensures that nurses have more influence at a higher level in clinical settings. In recognition of the fact that nurses and midwives should be at the heart of planning and decision making for the NHS, I announced a few weeks ago that a nurse director should be appointed to each of the 15 NHS boards. I expect that to be achieved by the end of next month. Nurses are important leaders of change. That is why we are doubling the number of nurses on leadership programmes. Today I can announce further measures to develop and support nurses throughout their careers. There will be a £1.75 million boost to NHS investment in skills development for nurses and midwives. That extra investment, on top of the money that is already being spent at local NHS level, will be a major step towards ensuring that all nurses get the continuing professional development that they deserve through their careers. We will consult nurses on the best possible use of that money in the interest of staff and patients.

Brian Adam (North-East Scotland) (SNP): Will the minister give way?

Malcolm Chisholm: Time will not allow me to take an intervention. I have only one and a half minutes left.

Flexibility is another key issue that has been raised at nursing conventions and elsewhere. Flexibility is about the NHS providing the care that patients want, at the time and in the place that they want it. It also about staff—in this case nurses—being able to find work that they want to do, at the times they want to do it, and in roles that they want and to which they are dedicated. We are committed to driving forward that agenda through training, spreading best practice and ensuring that the partnership information network guidelines on family-friendly working are implemented effectively.

Last but not least, I will address the issue of pay. Many of the hundreds of nurses around Scotland to whom I have listened in the past few months have raised the issue of pay. However, they have also mentioned continuing professional development, working conditions, work load, career structures and flexibility as issues on which they would like to see action. I, too, am concerned about pay. I am pleased that, since 1997, we have made some progress in that area through sustained above-inflation pay awards. However, I want to see further sustained progress on pay.

The agenda for change negotiations are taking forward the issue at United Kingdom level. I believe that most nurses support that. Nurses want progress to be made on pay alongside progress on service development. I agree with them. They certainly do not want the local pay that is supported by the SNP, which would set nurse against nurse and do nothing to solve the problems that we are addressing today. Because I know what the SNP's pay agenda is, I will not support the SNP amendment; nor will I support the Conservative amendment.

I move,

That the Parliament pays tribute to the vital contribution made by all members of health care teams across Scotland but, in this International Nurses' Week, recognises the central role of nurses and midwives in delivering high quality patient care and supports the significant investment and action to recruit, retain and value nurses and midwives being delivered through Facing the Future and other initiatives.

15:44

Nicola Sturgeon (Glasgow) (SNP): I thank nurses, midwives and health visitors for the enormous contribution that they make to patient care and the national health service. I also pay tribute to the Royal College of Nursing for its value nurses campaign. The wording of the Scottish Executive motion that we are debating today is a testament to the effectiveness of the RCN's consistent lobbying on many of the major issues that affect the nursing profession. I congratulate the college on placing the issue of recruitment and retention of nurses firmly on the political agenda.

Recruiting, retaining and rewarding nurses must be a key priority. Today there are 1,000 fewer nurses working in our health service than in 1995. There are 11,500 registered nurses who no longer work in the NHS. There are 2,000 nursing vacancies in Scotland—an increase of more than 500 since March 2000. The drop-out rate among nursing students is 25 per cent.

It is interesting that the minister raised the spectre of local pay bargaining. I spoke to nursing students at lunch time today and they expressed their real concerns about the number of newly qualified Scottish nurses who are lured away to England or further afield by the promise of more money and better career opportunities. That is the reality and the scale of the challenge that we face.

To be fair, the Government has taken some very positive initiatives. The announcement of the free return-to-practice pilot scheme for 150 nurses is a step in the right direction, but the scheme is open to only 1 per cent of the 11,500 nurses who could benefit from it. If we are to avert the crisis that primary and acute care face in attracting nursing staff, free return-to-practice courses should be available to all nurses who wish to return to the profession.

The pledge to put a nursing director on every NHS board is a positive development, of which I know that nurses in England and Wales are envious. That step marks progress for nursing and the NHS. The minister is to be congratulated on abandoning the somewhat intransigent attitude of his predecessor on that issue.

There are issues on which much more progress needs to be made. If it is clear—and it certainly is—that the public values nurses highly, why do we reward nurses with pay scales that are lower than those of other professions? Their starting salary is 10 per cent lower than that of police constables and 11 per cent lower than that of teachers. When nurses are in education and training that prevents them from supplementing their income with part-time employment, which other students routinely do, why are they expected to survive on bursaries, which, despite increases, are unable to support a decent standard of living?

Why do qualified nurses face often inflexible working patterns with long shifts and unsympathetic rotas, which force them out of the NHS and into agency nursing where they can access the part-time working and flexible hours that they need? Why do many qualified nurses choose not to return to nursing practice?

Only today, the general secretary of the RCN said:

"to attract nurses and keep them for the long term, the government needs to invest seriously in the workforce through pay, careers structure and employee friendly practices."

We must work to increase pay rates for nurses to reward them properly for the work that they do, to level the playing field with other professions and to give us a competitive edge in our ability to recruit and retain nurses. Tackling low pay in the nursing profession is fundamental to addressing the crisis that it and the NHS face. That, and nothing else, is the SNP's agenda on pay—to improve the quality of pay that we give our nurses and to attract more people into the profession.

Nursing is a low-pay profession. A nurse's starting salary of £16,000 remains below the national average of £17,000, and the low-pay culture that exists at the start of a nurse's career continues even as promotion and length-of-service awards come into play. The majority of consultant nurse posts, of which there are fewer in Scotland than there are south of the border, are advertised at the bottom of the pay scale. If valuing nurses is to be more than rhetoric, it must mean tackling low pay in the profession and rewarding nurses for taking on expanded roles and increased responsibilities. I am sorry that the minister has chosen to see a hidden agenda in the SNP's amendment, because it is quite simply about rewarding nurses better for the work that they do. Without that commitment, I fear that the Scottish Executive's commitment is nothing more than rhetoric.

Flexible working is another issue on which the Executive has had too little to say, but which is a huge issue for many nurses who are in practice or seek to return to practice. Trusts find it difficult to offer flexibility, yet many nurses cannot practise without it. The huge increase in the number of agency nurse staff reflects that. Options such as self-rotas, in which nurses organise their rotas collectively to accommodate child care or other difficulties, should be encouraged. In a profession that is 95 per cent female, many nurses need a level of flexibility that is not available. The flexibility initiative is a crucial strand of the facing the future initiative, which must seek meaningful practical solutions to the issue if we are to enable nurses to remain in or return to the NHS.

More must be done to improve opportunities for nurses' professional development. A third of nurses get no financial support from their employer for continuing professional development and nearly half get no time off for training. The fact of the matter is that the NHS needs nurses. It needs their skills, their input and insight, and their invaluable contribution to patient care, and it needs many more of them. Nurses are fundamental to the effective running of the health service. It is the Government's job to make nursing an attractive profession to draw new recruits into and to enable nurses to continue their career where they want to continue it—in the national health service.

Tackling low pay and delivering flexible working for nurses are not options; they are absolutely essential elements of a successful strategy to value nurses and value the NHS. I hope that we can reach some consensus in the chamber this afternoon on all those issues, because we owe nurses a great deal and all of us in this Parliament have a duty to start delivering for them in action, not just in words.

I move amendment S1M-3078.1, to insert at end:

"; notes that a newly registered nurse's salary, at £16,005, is 9.7% less than that of a newly qualified police constable and 11% less than that of a qualified teacher; believes that addressing low pay levels is central to addressing the problem of recruiting and retaining nurses; further welcomes the work of the Scottish Integrated Workforce Planning Group, and notes that the development of an adequately resourced workforce planning strategy is essential if NHS employers are to offer nurses the flexible working patterns and meaningful career paths that they are entitled to expect from a 21st century employer and that will enable them to continue working in the NHS."

15:50

Mary Scanlon (Highlands and Islands) (Con): Another week, another health debate, and this week another health minister, too. I welcome this debate on recruiting, retaining and valuing nurses, given that nurses provide 80 per cent of direct patient care. I must apologise, Presiding Officer, because I have to leave early to catch a train for the three-and-a-half-hour journey to Inverness, so I am afraid that I shall have to leave after my speech.

In speaking to my amendment, I note that the information and statistics division figures for 2000 show that nursing and midwifery staff numbers have fallen by 244 since Labour came to power and that hospital nurse numbers are down by 740. It is interesting to note that the new nurse numbers are due out tomorrow, as the minister said, and it would have been more appropriate to have this debate next week in the light of the latest figures.

Understaffing and sickness levels lead to even more pressure for existing staff, which affects nurse retention and morale. That problem is exacerbated by the fact that half of school nurses, practice nurses and health visitors are eligible to retire within the next decade. That is serious in itself, but it is even more serious given the predicted demographic patterns for elderly people and the need for more care at home.

Too often we hear, as we heard from the SNP today, that the NHS is too rigid in employing staff, and nurses are no exception. However, I give credit to Highland NHS Board, which seems at least to be facing up to the issue. In last week's Inverness Courier, I noticed an advertisement for a research nurse at grade E for 15 hours a week, staff nurses at grade D for 15 hours and 20 hours a week, and a nursing auxiliary for 15 hours a week. That is the kind of flexibility and family-friendly policy that we have all been asking for to bring back the many trained and experienced nurses who are not currently working in the NHS.

I also noted the pay scales for a nurse at grade E—from £17,000 to £20,000—and I could not help noticing the post that was advertised at the bottom of the group, for an audio typist

"providing secretarial cover throughout the Directorate, moving between the General Office, Medical Secretaries Office, Clinical Genetics Department and Nursing Administration."

The salary for that full-time post was £9,000 to £11,000. Although I fully support the emphasis on recruiting, retaining and valuing nurses, let us not forget the whole NHS team, including essential administration, secretarial and laboratory staff. Let us bear it in mind that one of the Beatson consultants cited the fact that he had to do his own typing as one of the reasons for walking out. Nurses are at the forefront of breaking down restrictive practices and old-style professional boundaries. They are prepared to take on more responsibilities and are capable of doing so, but we should not take advantage of their good will and commitment to care.

Recently, more emphasis has been placed on specialist nurses for multiple sclerosis, epilepsy, asthma and diabetes. At a recent Health and Community Care Committee meeting, Dr Roberts, a neurologist from Ninewells hospital, stressed the need for more specialist epilepsy nurses for counselling and support. That would also help to free up consultant time for crucial diagnosis and assessment of new patients. However, it is a matter of concern that 20 per cent of specialist asthma nurses do not hold the appropriate qualification. I welcome the additional money that has been allocated today for training, because we cannot expect nurses to take on more responsibilities without giving them the training and support that they need to carry them out.

Last week, nurse shortages in Orkney led to the proposal to close Macmillan House, which caters for terminally ill cancer patients, and St Magnus day hospital, which offers rehabilitation for patients such as stroke victims. In a large city, there is a larger pool of qualified staff for bank and agency nursing. In Orkney and other remote areas and islands, the flexibility simply does not exist.

The proposed closure has been averted temporarily, but the decision arose following staff resignations and retirements that coincided with training sessions for five nurses on family health nursing. I have spoken to the local member, who has stated his concerns and, I understand, has spoken to the Minister for Health and Community Care. I quote from The Orcadian on 25 April, when the Stromness doctors said:

"The staff retention, recruitment, job security, educational needs and working conditions have been consistently ignored by senior management of NHS Orkney with the inevitable results that we now see."

Ironically, there was no shortage of Macmillan nurses, but they were moved to acute wards.

The Orkney crisis could be replicated elsewhere in Scotland if we do not tackle nursing shortages. All parts of the NHS team need to be valued, not only nurses.

I move amendment S1M-3078.2, to leave out from "and supports" to end and insert:

"notes with concern, however, the recent decrease in nurse numbers; acknowledges that better staffing levels and conditions will lead to better morale and therefore higher levels of nurse retention, and therefore urges the Scottish Executive to promote a more flexible system that would recruit and retain appropriate numbers of nurses and midwives to serve Scotland's needs."

15:56

Mrs Margaret Smith (Edinburgh West) (LD): I am pleased to speak in the debate to acknowledge the work that Scotland's nurses do in international nurses week and throughout the year, and to highlight what we need to do to recruit, retain and retrain Scotland's nursing work force.

Nurses account for one half of the NHS work force and deliver 80 per cent of the care that it provides. They are the backbone of the NHS and must be valued as key members of the NHS front line. I am glad that the minister has agreed that nursing directors will be on the new unified NHS boards to ensure that the nurses' voice is heard at every possible level in the service.

I congratulate the RCN on its successful value nurses campaign. Over the summer recess, I took the opportunity to support the campaign by spending time shadowing some of our nursing staff as they went about their work with homeless people at the Access Point project in Edinburgh, with a community detoxification nurse in Bannockburn and with a nurse manager on a night shift at the Royal hospital for sick children at Yorkhill in Glasgow. From the comments that members have made so far, it is clear that nurses undertake an incredible range of tasks and duties on our behalf.

On those occasions and many others, including yesterday when I met nursing sisters from Forth Valley NHS Board, I have found that nurses are keen to talk about their professional needs and how we can recruit more nurses. Pay and conditions remain major issues. Although pay remains a matter for the United Kingdom independent pay review body, I hope that the Executive will do all that it can to press the case for progress to be made.

Brian Adam: Will Margaret Smith give way?

Mrs Smith: I will not give way. I have no time. I have only five minutes.

Brian Adam: There will be no debate if she does not give way.

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Mr George Reid): Order.

Mrs Smith: In areas in which the Scottish Executive has the power to make a positive difference to conditions, it has been listening to the RCN's campaign and has made some progress. The minister outlined that progress today, which includes studies of work loads and new work force development centres. Over the past months, Susan Deacon and Malcolm Chisholm have made welcome announcements that will impact positively on nurses. The minister has announced £5 million for nurse recruitment and retention initiatives this year. That will cover return-to-practice schemes, 250 more student nurse places and a guaranteed minimum of one year's employment for 15,000 newly qualified nurses and midwives.

Scotland has the highest attrition rate for nurses in the UK. A quarter of nursing students will not finish their courses. We must ask ourselves why that is and put in place mentoring schemes, as well as better information for potential nurses about what the job is really about. A 10 per cent increase in student bursaries, which was announced last July, and an end to the anomalies between degree and diploma students are both welcome and should go some way towards encouraging people to go into nursing training. However, as Tommy Sheridan said, there is still a long way to go.

Nurses work against a backdrop of increased work load for a number of reasons. With people spending less time in hospital before being discharged into the community, the average in-patient is in need of greater acute care than ever before. A shortage of nurses also means that nurses have to do extra shifts to cover the gaps.

We welcome the work of the Scottish integrated work force planning group. We need innovative approaches to make working more flexible, and we must do all that we can to encourage nurses to remain in the NHS team, either as contracted members of staff or as members of NHS banks. We must learn from the practice of nursing agencies so that we can offer staff the flexibility that they need at certain times in their lives, for example when they need time out or reduced hours to care for children or elderly relatives. Initiatives such as the acute trust nursing bank in the Forth Valley NHS Board area are to be applauded.

Susan Deacon held a nursing recruitment and retention convention last November, which I was pleased to attend. That spawned the facing the future implementation group and a series of meetings, the purpose of which was to examine specific areas of concern for nurses, including recruitment and retention. Continuing career development and training were the main issues that nurses consistently raised. In particular, 40 per cent of nurses have to pay the cost of continuing professional development themselves, while a further 40 per cent have to attend courses in their own time. Other nurses may be supported financially by their trust or board, but they know that organising cover so that they may attend courses is difficult, particularly in remote and rural areas.

We should do more to encourage career development. There are far more consultant nurses in England than in Scotland. We should give some thought to the fact that, when nurses embark on a career path, for example with NHS 24 or in specialist nursing grades, general ward nursing is possibly being left short of nurses at G grade and other senior staff.

One of the most welcome statements that the Executive has made recently was on the return-to-practice pilot courses. We need to roll out those courses across Scotland and reach out to the 10,000 qualified nurses who are currently not working in the NHS.

The success of all the policies that are set out in "Our National Health: A plan for action, a plan for change" and in Executive document after Executive document relies on nurses. Freeing up general practitioners' time, delivering on waiting times, improving public health, increasing nurse prescribing and providing nurse-led clinics are only a few of the things for which we rely on the flexibility of nurses.

I value this opportunity to say yet again how much we rely on nurses, and I look forward to the Executive making further progress on the issue.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We now come to the open debate. We are obviously tight for time, but I will allow speeches of four minutes with some extra time for interventions.

16:02

Sarah Boyack (Edinburgh Central) (Lab): I agree with other members that it is highly appropriate for us to hold this debate during international nurses week.

Since 1997, Labour has delivered 20,000 new nurses across the UK and has scrapped the two-stage pay awards. However, it takes time to encourage more people to become nurses and, while new nurses are being recruited, we are still losing existing nurses from the profession. The RCN has identified three issues that we must address:

"better pay, better resources to do the work and improved promotion prospects".

That chimes exactly with the representations that I have received from nurses and midwives in my constituency. I want to share with members some of the pressures that those nurses and midwives have shared with me. They have written to me about the pressures and stress of working in wards that are not fully staffed; the lack of training opportunities; the lack of financial support, which makes it difficult to take up training opportunities; and the struggle of studying and training while holding down a responsible and stressful job at the same time.

There is general dissatisfaction with the level of pay and a sense of disappointment at the lack of career development opportunities and the lack of recognition of the new competencies and medical procedures that many nurses are now undertaking. Nurses are also worried about the impact of vacancies not being filled. There is strong concern about the use of bank nursing, about the insufficient number of fully staffed wards and medical teams and about temporary nurses being brought in to fill the gaps.

Financial support for nurses and midwives during their training is a big issue and, as Malcolm Chisholm will know, I have received many letters from student nurses at Queen Margaret University College, who are disappointed that they have missed out on the recent bursary improvements. However, they will benefit from access to the guaranteed year's employment on graduation.

A common thread runs through the representations, based not just on individuals' self-interest but on concern about how the day-to-day pressure on nurses affects patient care. Every nurse who has contacted me has raised that issue.

Nicola Sturgeon: Will Sarah Boyack give way?

Sarah Boyack: No, thank you, Ms Sturgeon.

Those concerns are a legacy of what the Tories did to the health service. The recent pronouncements of Liam Fox show the Tories' real agenda. First, they want to break the link between the NHS and health care. Then, they want to cut public spending. The statistics show that the Tory Government cut nursery and midwifery training places by 23 per cent in Scotland. Under Labour, the number of places has already risen by 8 per cent.

Gordon Brown's budget will give us a wonderful opportunity to sort out the NHS and to raise morale across the service.

Ben Wallace (North-East Scotland) (Con): Will the member take an intervention?

Sarah Boyack: I will take a brief intervention.

Ben Wallace: How does Ms Boyack reconcile her fine words and the fine words of the Scottish Executive with the fact that the chancellor will take £5.8 million out of the pockets of Scottish nurses through his increase in national insurance contributions?

Sarah Boyack: I have not met any nurse who is unhappy about the massive increase that everyone recognises is going into the NHS. We need to talk up the fact that the money is coming to help to raise morale in the NHS.

It takes time for new recruits to come through the system. While the key changes are being put in place, we must acknowledge the day-to-day problems in the nursing profession. It is vital that nurses are able to see real improvements taking place. I agree with Margaret Smith that the return-to-practice pilots are vital throughout Scotland. The improvement in bursaries for student nurses is a great start, but those who are switching career or who have a family to support while they go through training still face a real challenge.

Like others, I welcome the fact that the unified NHS boards contain a nursing director, which is absolutely critical if we are to change the long-term culture in the NHS. Change is happening. I know that within Lothian there is a much bigger focus on tackling low pay across the health service, and I welcome that development. It is absolutely vital that we invest in our existing and future nurses as a key part of the NHS family. It is important to say to nurses and patients that we have listened to them and that the improvements that they need are coming soon.

Let us support the motion and send a message of confidence to nurses and to the NHS across Scotland.

16:07

Mr Kenneth Gibson (Glasgow) (SNP): Nurses now take on greater roles and greater responsibilities than ever before, but the average age of nurses is increasing. The average age in Scotland is now 47. The situation is particularly acute among nurses in general practitioner practices, as fully one third of them are over the age of 55. The profession has major problems with recruiting and retaining young people. Valuing nurses would assist retention and reduce the need to recruit in ever increasing numbers.

Nurses in different parts of Scotland have different priorities: rural nurses may pay more in travel expenses; city nurses may fear violence at work when they do night shifts. I highlighted that issue in the debate initiated by Margaret Smith last September. Nurses work excessive hours for pay that is considered to be low for public service workers. The independent review's recent 3 per cent award was considered disappointing by Unison and the Royal College of Nursing.

Although the return-to-practice programme is welcome, it is merely a pilot scheme. As Nicola Sturgeon indicated, the programme needs to be much wider in scope to attract back to nursing the number of nurses that is required to fill vacancies in the long term. The return-to-practice programme will bring more qualified staff into nursing, but it will not solve the demographic problem of our more experienced specialised nurses leaving for other jobs or retiring.

The United Nations has opposed the importation of health care professionals from third-world countries. Nations such as the Philippines—where some 75 per cent of doctors who qualify and some two thirds of nurses emigrate—are denuded of professional expertise. With fewer people entering the labour force in future years, we must encourage more of our own people into the nursing profession. In fact, we could persuade people from other parts of the United Kingdom—or, indeed, Europe—to take up nursing as a profession in Scotland.

If the current reliance of NHS hospitals on agency nurses is maintained, newly qualified nurses who work in NHS hospitals may be enticed to leave the NHS and work for agencies because of the better pay and conditions that they offer. In a survey of 6,000 nurses, the RCN identified the key areas that would enhance the productivity and quality of nursing, thereby reducing absenteeism and reliance on agency nurses, lowering nursing turnover, improving morale and nurses' safety and reducing stress.

Promoting the well-being of nurses would show that we value them and would create a happier work force. We need good employment practices under which flexible working hours are promoted and the needs of nurses with families are accommodated. Employee-friendly policies that help to promote a good work-life balance for nurses are essential. Where nurses are particularly stressed, psychological help and counselling should be available. We should also ensure that bullying and workplace harassment become things of the past.

The RCN's most recent annual survey shows that dissatisfaction with nursing centres on key issues, including work load, staffing levels, hours, roles and responsibilities, having to undertake non-nursing activities and pay. The First Minister has said on the record that the SNP's idea of paying more money to attract nurses from outwith Scotland to Scotland is daft. I understand that nurses in London receive a London weighting allowance. Is not that intended to attract nurses to London from other parts of the United Kingdom? I am sure that if the minister checked, he would find that several hundred Scottish nurses work in London and that Scottish nurses work in other parts of the UK. Surely we should retain such people in Scotland.

Throughout Europe, different countries have different rates of pay. In the United States, different states pay different rates. There is no reason for us not to create a competitive edge in Scotland by providing better pay than is provided in the rest of the United Kingdom. Nicola Sturgeon has mentioned in previous debates the difficulty in replacing NHS consultants at the Beatson oncology centre, because we have no competitive edge. That competitive edge should be not only for doctors, but for nurses. If we are to have the health service that everyone wants in the 21st century, we must compete, do better and pay the rate for the job. Scotland must lead health provision in the UK and to do that, we must pay the rate for the job.

Let us attract people from throughout Europe and the United Kingdom into nursing. Let us retain the nurses we have. Let us ensure that the profession is valued as we would like it to be valued.

16:11

Mr Jamie McGrigor (Highlands and Islands) (Con): The contribution that our nurses make to our health care system is phenomenal. They are the backbone of the NHS and without them the NHS would crumble. Therefore, ensuring that nurses are happy and motivated is vital for good patient care and the efficient running of our health service. If things go wrong, nurses are the first to experience the problems. While we may sit in our ivory towers, they are in direct contact with patients every day. They work tirelessly to help others for comparatively little reward.

The problem is that the nursing work force is too small. Recruitment and retention problems are huge and are caused by many factors. A demoralised work force leads nurses to leave the service and does not encourage many to enter it. Understaffing leads to overworked staff who can put up with only so much for so long. Continual change leads to continual uncertainty and instability. Lack of involvement in decision making leads to feelings of being uninvolved and undervalued. The constant pressure of dealing with patients who have waited too long for treatment leads to futility and anger.

Last September, I visited Lorne and Islands district general hospital in Oban, where nurses kindly gave me their valuable time to describe the pressure. It is intolerable that a huge number of nurses are being forced out of the NHS because they can no longer take the pressure. Nurses are hugely committed to a caring, vocational profession. We can only imagine what it takes to destroy that commitment.

Some of the Executive's initiatives are good, but they do not address the fundamental problem. They are akin to rearranging deckchairs on the Titanic. Nurses are leaving because they are not being allowed to do their jobs properly. Patients are waiting far too long for admission, which leaves them more severely ill and needing more intensive treatment. That leaves them weaker and more susceptible to hospital-acquired infection, which prolongs their stay. By that stage, many patients must be exasperated with the NHS, deeply frightened and perhaps in pain. Nurses bear the brunt of all that. Their job becomes infinitely more difficult if they see too many people needlessly suffering and dying. They must continually apologise for a system over which they have no control.

Many nurses are not leaving the health service and are simply moving to more flexible and responsive systems. England appears to be the prime beneficiary of that movement, along with other European countries and Australia. It does not take a genius to work out why. In Germany, nurses are happy, well trained and content. They work in clean hospitals and see patients when they need to be seen—almost immediately. As a result, the recovery rate is faster and greater, and nurses feel that, rather than just stemming the tide, they are having a positive impact on the health of their patients. That contrasts dramatically with the situation in our NHS.

The issue is not money. Germany puts only a small percentage more of public funding into its health service than we do, and soon, Scottish health funding will be higher than that in other European countries, including Germany. The difference is that Germany has a flexible, responsive system in which a happy work force provides patient-oriented care. There is no excuse for Scotland not to have that same quality.

I look forward to the day when there will be no waiting lists, when waiting times will be short, when there will be clean hospitals and when patients will be cared for by the appropriate number of well-qualified, highly motivated nurses. The nursing profession is full of wonderful people who are doing their best under impossible circumstances. Although some of the measures that the Scottish Executive has brought in seem to be good ideas, I ask how successful those measures will be and how they will improve patient care and nurse morale when our entire NHS system is working against them.

16:15

Brian Fitzpatrick (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab): Jamie McGrigor's contribution—or perhaps what was omitted from it—speaks volumes about the lack of consensus in Scotland on sustained and rising investment in the NHS. We will return to that theme in the months and years to come.

I welcome what the minister said in a debate that is of particular importance as it falls in international nurses week. It is obvious that ministers are aware that nurses and other health professionals are wholly thirled to investment in skills and people, so the investments in training and skills that the minister has announced are most welcome.

We have a world-class reputation for excellence in nursing, in midwifery and—increasingly—in health care education. I mention the benefits that arise nationally, across the UK and internationally from the work that is being undertaken at institutions such as Glasgow Caledonian University, which is in the constituency of my colleague Pauline McNeill. That institution is making a particular contribution to supporting the developing skills and training agenda. The programmes of its innovative department of nursing and community health, which are delivered by a multidisciplinary group, operate through the use of controlled learning environments, including skills learning laboratories. The facilities—which I urge Malcolm Chisholm and other ministers to visit if they have not yet done so—allow nursing students and nurse returners to respond to and learn from their participation in complex nursing case studies in the context of a simulated learning environment. This week, the benefits of such programmes are being discussed as far away as Jordan.

I want to mention the importance of providing nursing staff and others with designed-for-purpose buildings, which co-locate diagnostic, out-patient, day patient, casualty and day surgery services with the professions that are allied to medicine. Such buildings allow as much as possible to be done in a single visit and avoid an unnecessary series of repeated visits. Developments of that kind must be good for patients and staff, as they offer enhanced opportunities to develop new skills and allow medical and nursing staff to work together in multidisciplinary teams to meet patients' needs more effectively and to deliver convenient and seamless care.

My colleague Paul Martin and I are determined that early progress should be made on the same-day hospital at the Stobhill health campus, which is in Paul Martin's constituency. We will continue to discuss in-patient beds with Scottish ministers and the minister will have our full support in encouraging Greater Glasgow NHS Board to expedite work as soon as possible at the new £60 million facility.

I welcome the progress that has been made on nurse practitioner prescribing, which was in currency as long ago as 1987. That idea was kicked about by the Tories, just as they kicked about the NHS as a whole. Nurse practitioner prescribing has been delivered under Labour only in the past three years. Such career opportunities for nurse practitioners are part of the process of rebuilding Scotland's national health service.

16:19

Alex Neil (Central Scotland) (SNP): Members of all parties have produced statistics on a variety of issues, such as the number of nurses who leave the profession, the number of nursing students who leave before completing their courses, nurses' ages and nurses' pay. In my opinion, the principal issue is the individual nurse and what the nurse represents in terms of hospital care.

Last week, when I visited someone in Hairmyres hospital, I found that there were major problems in the contracts for catering and cleaning. I was in a ward where the food was absolutely abysmal—I would not have fed it to a pig, never mind to a patient—and where the bathroom had been cleaned only once in a whole week. The person who stood up for the patients and who caused the most fuss was the nurse in charge of the ward, supported by her staff. She was prepared to put her neck and her career on the line for her patients. We have to recognise that kind of dedication.

The nursing profession does not just want lip service from the Parliament and the Executive about how much we value our nurses. We will have to take action to prove that we value them. Until we do, all the figures on the student drop-out rates, on the lack of retention and on morale problems will continue to get worse.

The major, although not the only, bone of contention for nurses is undoubtedly pay. The major bone of contention between the Executive and the Scottish National Party is over how we should deal with the issue of nurses' pay. The Executive believes that there is only one solution, which they allege to be a United Kingdom solution. That solution is to pay every nurse the length and breadth of the UK exactly the same.

That fails to recognise that, south of the border, special rates are already paid. Ever since the health service was created, special rates have been paid in London in recognition of higher living costs. There are also special allowances to boost recruitment and retention in areas of staff shortages—for example, among low-paid nursing auxiliaries, nurse consultants and matrons. Discretionary points will also be given to entice those who have reached the top of their field in nursing to remain in the NHS. All that proves to me that differential pay structures are not new. We should not automatically react against the idea.

We face a particular situation in Scotland. If we do not solve the nursing shortage and the morale problem, all the money that we spend on the health service will not cure its ills. That is why we believe that it would be perfectly fair and acceptable to have a differential pay structure to recognise the special problems in Scotland. Until we have one, the problems of the health service will not be properly addressed. I hope that when the minister winds up—whichever minister it is—we will be told why it is okay to have differentials south of the border but not north of the border.

If figures are coming out tomorrow, why can the minister not give them to the chamber today, rather than making us wait for the Daily Record or The Herald tomorrow morning?

16:23

Donald Gorrie (Central Scotland) (LD): I will concentrate on two points—job satisfaction and prisons. Three things make a job worth having and attract people to it: pay and conditions; the public esteem, or otherwise, in which it is held; and job satisfaction. In the Parliament, we are okay on job satisfaction and pay and conditions, but we get zero for public esteem. As for nurses, we are beginning to address their pay and conditions. The Executive is to be congratulated on that, although there is a long way to go. In public esteem, nurses rate very highly. However, in job satisfaction, we are failing them.

The solution is not just a question of money; it is about a revolution in the health industry, if we can call it that. Because of their experience, nurses are much better than doctors at performing many duties and they should be encouraged in that. For example, the western general hospital in Edinburgh has for some years had a minor injuries clinic, which is run by nurses. I owe them a lot because they helped to save my bacon when I was taken in on Christmas eve—not on account of drink, I assure members. Other nurses looked after me very well over Christmas and the new year, when they might have been pretty grumpy. They sorted me out and now I am once again full of fight against the powers that be.

Greater job satisfaction comes through greater responsibility. We need a career structure in nursing that offers more promotion and more worthwhile jobs that still involve nursing, rather than paper shuffling. We need more in-service training. We have heard evidence from the nursing profession that it is difficult for many nurses to get in-service training.

Another issue is agency nurses. I am sure that individual agency nurses are excellent people, but I am also sure that they get less job satisfaction than nurses who continue to look after the same people in the same ward. The situation would be like MSPs being told that one week they were the MSP for Dundee East and the next week they would be the MSP for Argyll and Bute. We would not like that at all. That is the position that agency nurses are in. I hope that ministers will consider the important issues of creating a worthwhile career structure, improving training and expanding nurses' responsibility.

My second point relates to jails. The Justice 1 Committee has become the jail visiting committee—every Monday we visit a different jail. So far, to my wife's relief, we have always been let out for good behaviour. It has become apparent to me that serious efforts are being made to turn prisoners around; the issue is not just about locking people up. The health centre plays an important part in sorting out prisoners, partly because so many prisoners are on drugs. Barlinnie is the largest dispenser of methadone in Scotland, closely followed by Saughton—150 and 120 prisoners respectively get regular supplies. Drug taking is a huge issue in prisons and the nurses and the health centre have to deal with it.

Increasingly, prisons are becoming mental institutions. Many prisoners have serious mental health problems that must be attended to. The health centre is a vital part of the whole enterprise. However, such centres find it difficult to get staff. All the centres that we visited are seriously understaffed. I ask the minister to talk to his colleagues in the justice department to help to provide the important nursing services that add to the team aiming to turn prisoners around. If we do not address that issue, it will cause great problems in the future.

16:28

Janis Hughes (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab): I declare an interest as a member of Unison. As a nurse, I am delighted to speak in today's debate. During my years in the health service, I considered myself first and foremost to be a member of the health care team. That is why I am particularly pleased that the motion pays tribute to all members of the team.

I am pleased to welcome the Executive's commitment and efforts to recruit, retain and value nurses, given that that has proved difficult in the past. "Facing the Future", the report on last year's convention on recruitment and retention in nursing and midwifery, states:

"the career journey for nurses and midwives is often ill defined and ambiguous".

I concur with that point. Perhaps the main reason for the problem is that, now, the only route into nursing is academic. Some members will know that the issue is a particular hobby-horse of mine. I believe that we are disfranchising many people who would make excellent nurses but who are unable or choose not to follow the academic route into nursing. If we are to take the recruitment and retention of nurses seriously, we must consider making other choices available.

Over the years, one of the most important issues facing nurses has been their extended role in health care. The minister mentioned some of the specialist nurses who were recently recruited to work in our communities and to make things better for a host of people with specific illnesses.

Nursing as a career has changed and developed and nurses have been flexible enough to welcome the challenges that have been offered. However, payback for that willingness has not always been forthcoming. Career structures often leave a lot to be desired; if pathways are not clearly marked out in work force planning arrangements, that can lead to frustration. I am pleased that the minister mentioned the extra £1.75 million for skills development. That is an important area, which I hope will lead to better career pathways and more satisfaction with career development.

Flexibility is another important issue. Family-friendly policies, such as child care provision and flexible working arrangements, are sadly lacking in some workplaces, although many trusts are now working towards implementing such policies. I am particularly pleased that the Executive is monitoring the situation and will publish evidence later this year. Actions must be demonstrable. We should not just have paper policies.

Another issue that all NHS staff face is employment stability. Acute services reviews—my colleague Brian Fitzpatrick mentioned them in the context of the proposed ambulatory care and diagnostic facilities at Stobhill hospital and the Victoria infirmary in Glasgow—are much needed, but they have led to uncertainty about future workplaces and staff have not always been involved in consultation. That does not help recruitment. I know that to be the case from personal experience at the Victoria infirmary in my area. Hospitals facing closure have great difficulty in attracting staff in the short term. That must be borne in mind when acute services reviews or any changes in service provision are planned.

Attracting people into nursing in the first place is probably the most important issue. Recruitment campaigns must be imaginative and targeted at young people and those who wish to have a career change later in life. However, that applies to a large number of careers in the health service. How many people today aspire to be medical laboratory scientific officers, occupational therapists or radiographers? Probably not many, unfortunately. There are national shortages in a host of occupational groups in the NHS. We must channel our energies into addressing that problem.

I urge the minister to examine seriously the way in which we train our nurses and to consider offering a non-academic route into the profession. I am happy to support the motion and I welcome the Executive's commitment to value nurses, particularly as this is international nurses week. However, I emphasise that nurses are only one part of the team and I look forward to the day when we celebrate international porters week or the international week of medical secretaries.

16:32

Robin Harper (Lothians) (Green): I promise to be brief. I shall frame my contribution in the form of several short questions.

The Minister for Health and Community Care has been made aware of looming problems with financial support for third and fourth-year academic nursing students. Will that situation be addressed in the near future?

The incidence of surgical intervention at birth is increasing throughout the western world, but is that of concern to the Executive? The minister mentioned nurses and midwives in his speech several times, but he made no specific reference to midwifery. He did not say whether he has met midwives—he has met many other organisations. If he has not, will he meet them in the near future? Will he guarantee support for them and for the continued development of midwifery services in Scotland?

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Several names are left on my screen. One member is not here, so I can give Tommy Sheridan two minutes.

16:34

Tommy Sheridan (Glasgow) (SSP): I will be quick. We must make the point when we discuss the value of nurses that, although it is questionable whether an MSP is worth one newly registered nurse, it is unquestionable that we are not worth three. It is from that point of view that we must address the central priority of improving the pay of nurses in our hospitals—that is the number one priority in relation to retention, recruitment and job satisfaction. Of course, other factors contribute to job satisfaction, but pay has to be a central one.

In considering nurses' pay, we must not forget the team ethic. Medical secretaries, midwives, radiographers, porters and auxiliaries are all essential parts of the team. The yawning gap between the pay of many of those team members and that of others in our hospitals is unacceptable and has to be bridged.

The other point that I want to address in my final minute is the use of agency nurses. Audit Scotland's report into the use of agency nurses, "Temporary measures: managing bank and agency nursing staff", was published in February 2000. The commission instructed health trusts across Scotland to examine the use of agency nurses and to employ permanent staff instead of agency nurses. At the time, 562 agency nurses were employed every day in the health service; today, however, I hear that the figure has risen to 725. That means that, despite Audit Scotland's report, more and not fewer temporary agency nurses are being employed. I hope that the minister will address that issue when she sums up. How will we get more permanent nurses employed in the health service? Hospitals need to use fewer agency nurses and to stop relying on the bank hour system, which often undermines morale and lessens the desire to recruit and retain nurses.

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Mr Murray Tosh): We come to the closing speeches. I call George Lyon to close for the Liberal Democrats.

16:36

George Lyon (Argyll and Bute) (LD): I put on the record my appreciation of the role that our nurses play in delivering health care. Over the past few months, as a father, I have had the misfortune of having to attend hospital three times, as my youngest daughter has gone through a Calamity Jane phase in her life. First, she was run over by a car. Secondly, she swam back-stroke into a swimming pool wall and had to be taken to hospital. Thirdly, during a fun night at the local swimming pool, someone jumped on her and she had to be taken to hospital with a suspected broken vertebra in her neck. On all those occasions, the nurses were truly wonderful not only in dealing with my daughter's concerns, but in calming the fears of the parents, especially on the last occasion. As I said, I, too, want to put on the record how much I value and appreciate the work that our nurses do.

I will highlight some of the problems that we face in rural areas in trying to retain and recruit nurses. Many of those problems are identical to the ones that we face in trying to recruit and retain rural GPs. Nurses are required to undertake out-of-hours commitments and they have to work longer hours than is the norm in an urban situation. In places such as the isles of Lismore and Gigha, nurses live in the local community and are on call virtually 24 hours a day, seven days a week. No other health care is available; if something goes wrong, they are the ones who have to come running regardless of the time of day or night.

In many rural communities, the shortage of bank nurses exacerbates working problems. A shortage of bank staff means that less cover is available for illness, holidays or emergencies. Nurses who work in rural areas are required to be multiskilled; they need a greater range of skills in both primary and acute care work. When an accident happens, no matter how serious, nurses are the front-line staff who have to deal with the patient in the first instance. An accident in a rural area often means a flight out by helicopter or plane to get the patient to the acute hospital where they will be seen by a consultant or a doctor.

Nurses carry a huge and a heavy responsibility on their shoulders. There is a feeling among the nursing staff to whom I speak that the current reward structure fails to recognise the extra burdens and the heavy responsibilities that many of them have to carry. I hope that the Executive will look seriously at how to address that issue.

There is no doubt that the coalition has done a substantial amount of work to try to improve the recruitment and retention of nurses in Scotland. In setting up the remote and rural areas resource initiative in Inverness, the Executive has tried to address some of the specific problems that are involved in delivering rural health care. It was hoped that RARARI would come up with new and sustainable models of delivering health care in rural areas. However, after three years, health professionals feel that RARARI is not delivering on the high expectations that its introduction created. The initiative has failed to come up with a truly sustainable rural model for delivering health care. There is a feeling that too many pet projects are being funded and that there is a tendency to work with individuals instead of with organisations, which leads to a disconnection between RARARI and the Highlands and Islands health organisations. I ask the minister to examine RARARI's work and whether it is delivering on what was expected of it—that it would formulate a sustainable rural health model to overcome some of the problems that I have just highlighted.

16:40

Ben Wallace (North-East Scotland) (Con): I join with other members in paying tribute to the RCN's value nurses campaign, which was successful in raising the priority of nursing and lifting the onus that we place on nurses in society.

Although the Scottish Conservatives welcome today's opportunity to debate and highlight the nursing profession, we should not forget that there are other members in the health care team. Before I go on, I should point out that we support the Executive's measures to better the lot of nurses and improve their training. There is a consensus in the Parliament that the Executive has introduced some good measures, and we wish them luck.

However, we must also remember that over the past couple of years the Scottish Executive has presided over a decline in the number of nursing posts. We have lost nurses to the south for a number of reasons. Someone has to take responsibility for that situation.

The changes to the NHS have produced a service that is more centrally controlled and suffers from more political interference than before. Although Labour boldly says that it is pro-NHS, that does not always follow. Who could forget Susan Deacon's claim that people within the service itself were exaggerating and scaremongering to get more resources? Indeed, what about Tony Blair's speech about the scars on his back?

When I was asked to take part as the Conservative speaker in the Unison hustings during the general election campaign, I found that every party except Labour had sent a representative to address Unison members. Of course, I did not get the best welcome, but at least I turned up and put my money where my mouth was.

Tommy Sheridan: I bet that the Unison members were not cheering at the end.

Ben Wallace: I think they thought I was new Labour, which put them off a bit.

Sarah Boyack says that nurses are delighted to pay increased national insurance contributions. Are they really? The nurses that I have spoken to will not be delighted at the prospect of losing 30 per cent of next year's pay rise because of the increase in NI contributions. Indeed, as the employer, the NHS will have to find another £5.8 million to cover that increase. I do not think that nurses are unanimous in their support for that measure.

I also find Brian Fitzpatrick's comments in that respect interesting. He did not have the same principles when he voted himself a 13 per cent pay rise. Although I do not always agree with Tommy Sheridan, I agree with him on this issue. If we are going to value our public servants—

Brian Fitzpatrick: Will Ben Wallace take this opportunity to say that the Conservatives would match Labour's commitment to sustained and rising investment in the NHS? In other words, would the Conservatives match our budget booster?

Ben Wallace: The Scottish Conservatives recognise that there needs to be more investment in health care, but we do not necessarily agree that it should be funnelled into the current NHS system.

Brian Fitzpatrick: That is a no, then.

Ben Wallace: No. Why does Labour not consider taking advantage of the 1.1 per cent increase in gross domestic product in Scotland that has been completely ignored by the NHS? Other countries do not ignore private funding streams and end up with better results, morale and staffing levels. The onus is on people such as Brian Fitzpatrick to come up with proper imaginative ideas for better outcomes.

We do not believe in using nurses as a human shield when a debate on the NHS comes up. Instead, we believe that if we depoliticise the health service and leave service workers to get on with their job, they will do much better. Alan Milburn—the odious Alan Milburn, as I think John McAllion called him last week—has returned to devolving responsibility for health care decisions, with the result that there is now better retention and recruitment of nurses in the NHS in England, and often at the expense of nurses in Scotland.

The Scottish Conservatives want to go further on certain issues. We want better mapping of the location and number of specialist nurses. When I asked the minister how many nurses who specialise in epilepsy there are in Scotland, he could not tell me. How can we develop a managed clinical network, if we do not know what assets are at our fingertips to help to support it?

I urge members to support Mary Scanlon's amendment. We will support the motion but not the SNP's amendment. We believe that nurses should be valued and left alone to nurse.

16:45

Brian Adam (North-East Scotland) (SNP): I, too, should declare an interest: I am married to a nurse. One of the main problems that nurses face is the significantly anti-social hours. There must be an attempt to address that problem because such hours are not family friendly. When my wife returned to work, she started off by working what is called a twilight shift. For members who do not know what that is, I say that it means that one's wife returns home at 2.30 in the morning with cold feet. She leaves for work at around quarter to 9 at night and comes home at half past 2 in the morning. It is not only nurses but whole families who have difficulty with anti-social hours.

Sometimes, after a late shift, my wife sets off for what is known euphemistically as an early shift. She works from half past 1 in the afternoon to half past 9, which means that she gets home at 10.30 and is up again at 6 in the morning to go back to work. That is not an unusual work pattern. It is little surprise that nowadays people are not so willing to accept such arrangements. There must be much more flexibility because there are often very rigid ideas about how to deliver. That reflects the management culture.

I am delighted that the minister is willing to consider that point and to fund leadership training. That should not just involve training people to sit on the management board; it should involve training people to manage staff throughout the nursing profession. Too few resources have gone into training people how to manage. For many years, managers in the NHS have been ready targets for politicians. The service must be managed effectively, but I do not think that that happens. To have staff who are content in their work and to deliver better work patterns, skilled managers are required. Resources must be put into that.

The minister mentioned the £1.75 million of new money for skills development. I assume that that is to go towards continuous professional development—not everyone wishes to be a manager. One big gap is that nurses, because of their dedication and commitment, do continuous professional development in their own time and at their own expense for the benefit of patients and the service. I want a significant shift in that. Less discretion should be left to local management. People who are employed in skilled jobs should have the right to access training. Time and money will have to be made available for that. I hope that the ministerial team will take that on board as part of the new skills development programme.

I have a great deal of sympathy with Janis Hughes's point that there should not be only an academic approach to nursing and the other professions in the NHS in which there is a significant skills shortage—many of which she named. We should not insist that all those professions must be graduate professions. I have no problem with professions wishing to raise their skills level, but there are many professions in which the skills required are not solely academic, if they are academic at all. It must be possible to enter professions through a route that is not exclusively academic. Janis Hughes mentioned medical laboratory scientific officers.

I will finish my remarks with a comment about pay. Kenny Gibson rightly pointed out that differentials exist throughout the country. What we have not heard about in the debate is the grade drift and de-skilling that goes on. To enhance pay rates, some nurses in London will be on a grade that they would never be on in Edinburgh. They are on that grade just because they happen to be in London, and they also receive a London weighting allowance. That happens across the professions. Those of us who have worked in the NHS are well aware of that approach.

The ministerial team has the power to address such issues. It is possible for ministers to find innovative ways of addressing the pay difficulties. Donald Gorrie was totally wrong to congratulate the Executive on its contribution to changing pay for nursing staff, because the Executive has made no contribution to that. That is dealt with at the UK level, although there is scope for dealing with it here—not for the sake of making Scots nurses and midwives different, but for the sake of ensuring that the nurses and midwives who work in Scotland are satisfied.

16:51

The Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care (Mrs Mary Mulligan): Everybody who has spoken in the debate has recognised the fact that nurses are playing a growing role in the NHS. They are increasingly pivotal in driving our health reforms, improving services to patients and playing a major part in the development of public health and care in our communities. Getting the right number of nurses and midwives in the right place is vital and we are taking steps to ensure that they have the right skills to meet the rapidly changing needs of the NHS today and for the future. As nurses and midwives take on expanded roles, we must ensure that we support them by helping to create the additional capacity that will be required. Action is under way to establish a framework to deliver better work force planning, which will be based on sound research into nurses' work loads.

We have already delivered significant improvements in the recruitment and retention of nurses in Scotland. We have recruited more nurses for specialties such as intensive care and cancer and more nurses in primary care and in our communities. Brian Fitzpatrick recognised the role of prescribing nurses. Up to 3,000 had been trained by April 2001 and all district nurses and health visitors are now eligible. We have also recruited more nurses in new areas such as public health, family health nursing, infection control and NHS24.

Brian Fitzpatrick: I take issue with Alex Neil's uncharacteristically intemperate accusation about the release of national statistics tomorrow. Does the minister agree that Mr Neil failed to recognise the work that has been done to restore faith in the integrity of national statistics? Does she agree that it would be wholly inappropriate to reverse agreed procedures for the release of official statistics simply to give some seeming advantage to ministers in today's debate?

Mrs Mulligan: I was going to say to Mr Neil that we are not delaying the release of the numbers as he may have been suggesting. We do not have them. When we asked for the debate to be held today, we were not aware that they were going to be released tomorrow.

Although there is much going on, there is still much more to do. We know that because we are listening to nurses and front-line staff who are telling us what else needs to be done. Through the national and the six local nurse recruitment conventions, we have brought together some 800 nurses and midwives and given them the opportunity to be involved in shaping the policies that affect them. Nurses in Glasgow are considering return-to-practice schemes; nurses in the Forth valley are defining flexible working; and nurses in Tayside are working to improve education and training.

One further convention is planned specifically for nursing and midwifery students, to help to identify and address issues surrounding pre-registration training. That will dovetail with other work concerning nurse cadets and the future role that health care assistants and other support workers could play in helping to create additional capacity in the service. We want there to be a consistent and managed approach to that important issue throughout Scotland.

I will pick up the point that Janis Hughes made about enrolled nurses. The reason for the withdrawal of the position of enrolled nurse was the dissatisfaction and frustration on the part of many enrolled nurses at the end of the 1980s and the beginning of the 1990s. They felt that their position was being abused and patronised within the profession. However, I recognise the points that Janis Hughes made and we will need to discuss with the nursing profession the matter of a less academic route into the profession.

Janis Hughes: I thank the minister for her comments. However, I was careful when I raised the matter not to say that there should be a return to enrolled nurses. I am an enrolled nurse and I understand the point about the lack of career progression. However, I think that we could come up with some form of agreed career structure that would give a non-academic route into the profession but would also allow job satisfaction.

Mrs Mulligan: I recognise that Janis Hughes is making a positive contribution to the discussion; I want the discussion to be continued with nurses.

We have added to the package that makes nursing more attractive as a career option. The package includes increases in pay for all nurses and increases in student bursaries; the pay increase for nurses is 3.6 per cent. We accepted the recommendations of the nursing pay review board, with no staging, for the fourth year. We are committed to improving pay in the short term and the long term and to modernising the pay structure.

Nicola Sturgeon: I am the first to recognise that all the initiatives that the minister is talking about are welcome. However, will she respond to these points that student nurses made to me at lunch time? The key thing that they wanted to talk about was that many of them feel unable to stay and work in Scotland because of the low starting salaries here and the lure of better salaries and career opportunities south of the border. How will the Scottish Executive tackle that problem, so that the greater number of people that it is putting into nurse training places are not lost south of the border as soon as they qualify?

Mrs Mulligan: I will come to pay and the differentials that Nicola Sturgeon mentioned, if she bears with me for a moment.

We are also considering action on career and role development. Donald Gorrie mentioned the nurses who work in the minor injuries unit at the western general. I met them yesterday and know that they are developing their skills. We also see action on career progression and development and on leadership training. The Minister for Health and Community Care announced that there will be £1.75 million for skills development.

Through "Facing the Future" we have recently announced action that will lead to a further 150 experienced nurses retraining and rejoining the NHS, a further increase of 250 in the student nurse intake and a guarantee of one year's employment in NHS Scotland for all newly qualified nurses who want that. I think that Nicola Sturgeon would agree that that is a further move to ensure that nurses continue their training here in Scotland, which is important to all of us. There will be a doubling of the number of nurses participating in leadership programmes and action will be taken to give nurses and midwives a greater say in decision making, through an increase in the number of nurse consultants and through membership on the 15 NHS boards. That was welcomed by many members who spoke in the debate.

Robin Harper mentioned the role of midwives. Mr Harper will be aware that I am chairing a review of maternity services. Central to that is the safety of mother and babies. I assure Mr Harper that I will be taking forward the positive role of midwives in leading that service.

The nurse shortages that are experienced in certain specialties and in certain areas of Scotland are more to do with the need to be more effective in work force planning than they are to do with pay. That is why local pay bargaining, which has been suggested by the SNP this afternoon and has previously been rejected by staff, is not the solution.

We are working to improve the pay, conditions and morale of all nurses, not just a minority of nurses. We are playing a full part in UK talks to modernise the NHS pay system and we have made it clear that we are willing to invest in that reform.

We recognise that our health service is delivered by people in a number of professions and roles, all of whom display dedication and care. The motion refers to that and the Parliament recognises that. However, I cannot imagine that anyone will object to us taking some time today, during international nurses week, to recognise the central role of nurses.

Parliamentary Bureau Motions

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): The next item of business is consideration of three Parliamentary Bureau motions: one on the appointment of a committee substitute, one on committee membership and one on the designation of a lead committee. To save Euan Robson's breath, I suggest that he move all three motions together.

Motions moved,

That the Parliament agrees that Karen Whitefield be the nominated committee substitute for the Labour Party on the Education, Culture and Sport Committee as permitted under Rule 6.3A.

That the Parliament agrees that the following Members be appointed to Committees—

Cathy Peattie to replace Frank McAveety on the Education, Culture and Sport Committee;

Paul Martin to replace Frank McAveety on the Standards and the Procedures Committees;

Wendy Alexander to replace Angus MacKay on the Justice 1 Committee; and

Kenneth Gibson to replace Tricia Marwick on the Local Government Committee.

That the Parliament agrees that the Social Justice Committee is designated as lead committee in consideration of the Debt Arrangement and Attachment (Scotland) Bill and that the Justice 1 and 2 Committees and the Local Government Committee be secondary committees.—[Euan Robson.]

Decision Time

17:01

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): There are seven questions to be put to chamber at decision time. [Interruption.] Order. Last week the Deputy Presiding Officer miscalled a vote because neither he nor the clerks could hear. I ask members to concentrate on the question that is being put and on the results of divisions.

The first question is that motion S1M-3063, in the name of Johann Lamont, on behalf of the Social Justice Committee, on the committee's inquiry into the voluntary sector, be agreed to.

Motion agreed to.

That the Parliament notes the Social Justice Committee's 1st Report 2002, Report on Inquiry into the Voluntary Sector (SP Paper 531).

The Presiding Officer: The second question is that amendment S1M-3078.1, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, which seeks to amend motion S1M-3078, in the name of Malcolm Chisholm, on action to recruit, retain and value nurses, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

Members: No.

The Presiding Officer: There will be a division.

FOR

Adam, Brian (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Campbell, Colin (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Canavan, Dennis (Falkirk West)
Cunningham, Roseanna (Perth) (SNP)
Ewing, Dr Winnie (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Fabiani, Linda (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Gibson, Mr Kenneth (Glasgow) (SNP)
Grahame, Christine (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Hamilton, Mr Duncan (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Harper, Robin (Lothians) (Green)
Hyslop, Fiona (Lothians) (SNP)
Ingram, Mr Adam (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Lochhead, Richard (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
MacAskill, Mr Kenny (Lothians) (SNP)
MacDonald, Ms Margo (Lothians) (SNP)
Marwick, Tricia (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Matheson, Michael (Central Scotland) (SNP)
McGugan, Irene (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
McLeod, Fiona (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Morgan, Alasdair (Galloway and Upper Nithsdale) (SNP)
Neil, Alex (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Paterson, Mr Gil (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Quinan, Mr Lloyd (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Reid, Mr George (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Russell, Michael (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Sheridan, Tommy (Glasgow) (SSP)
Sturgeon, Nicola (Glasgow) (SNP)
Swinney, Mr John (North Tayside) (SNP)
Ullrich, Kay (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Welsh, Mr Andrew (Angus) (SNP)
Wilson, Andrew (Central Scotland) (SNP)

AGAINST

Alexander, Ms Wendy (Paisley North) (Lab)
Baillie, Jackie (Dumbarton) (Lab)
Barrie, Scott (Dunfermline West) (Lab)
Boyack, Sarah (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
Brankin, Rhona (Midlothian) (Lab)
Brown, Robert (Glasgow) (LD)
Butler, Bill (Glasgow Anniesland) (Lab)
Chisholm, Malcolm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab)
Craigie, Cathie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab)
Curran, Ms Margaret (Glasgow Baillieston) (Lab)
Deacon, Susan (Edinburgh East and Musselburgh) (Lab)
Eadie, Helen (Dunfermline East) (Lab)
Ferguson, Patricia (Glasgow Maryhill) (Lab)
Finnie, Ross (West of Scotland) (LD)
Fitzpatrick, Brian (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)
Gorrie, Donald (Central Scotland) (LD)
Grant, Rhoda (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Gray, Iain (Edinburgh Pentlands) (Lab)
Henry, Hugh (Paisley South) (Lab)
Home Robertson, Mr John (East Lothian) (Lab)
Hughes, Janis (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab)
Jackson, Dr Sylvia (Stirling) (Lab)
Jackson, Gordon (Glasgow Govan) (Lab)
Jamieson, Cathy (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab)
Jenkins, Ian (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD)
Kerr, Mr Andy (East Kilbride) (Lab)
Lamont, Johann (Glasgow Pollok) (Lab)
Livingstone, Marilyn (Kirkcaldy) (Lab)
Lyon, George (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
Macdonald, Lewis (Aberdeen Central) (Lab)
Macintosh, Mr Kenneth (Eastwood) (Lab)
Maclean, Kate (Dundee West) (Lab)
Macmillan, Maureen (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Martin, Paul (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab)
McAllion, Mr John (Dundee East) (Lab)
McAveety, Mr Frank (Glasgow Shettleston) (Lab)
McCabe, Mr Tom (Hamilton South) (Lab)
McConnell, Mr Jack (Motherwell and Wishaw) (Lab)
McLeish, Henry (Central Fife) (Lab)
McMahon, Mr Michael (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab)
McNeil, Mr Duncan (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab)
McNeill, Pauline (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab)
McNulty, Des (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab)
Morrison, Mr Alasdair (Western Isles) (Lab)
Muldoon, Bristow (Livingston) (Lab)
Mulligan, Mrs Mary (Linlithgow) (Lab)
Munro, John Farquhar (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD)
Murray, Dr Elaine (Dumfries) (Lab)
Oldfather, Irene (Cunninghame South) (Lab)
Peacock, Peter (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Peattie, Cathy (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Radcliffe, Nora (Gordon) (LD)
Raffan, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (LD)
Robson, Euan (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD)
Rumbles, Mr Mike (West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine) (LD)
Simpson, Dr Richard (Ochil) (Lab)
Smith, Iain (North-East Fife) (LD)
Smith, Mrs Margaret (Edinburgh West) (LD)
Stephen, Nicol (Aberdeen South) (LD)
Stone, Mr Jamie (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
Thomson, Elaine (Aberdeen North) (Lab)
Wallace, Mr Jim (Orkney) (LD)
Watson, Mike (Glasgow Cathcart) (Lab)
Whitefield, Karen (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab)

ABSTENTIONS

Aitken, Bill (Glasgow) (Con)
Douglas-Hamilton, Lord James (Lothians) (Con)
Fergusson, Alex (South of Scotland) (Con)
Fraser, Murdo (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Gallie, Phil (South of Scotland) (Con)
Harding, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Johnstone, Alex (North-East Scotland) (Con)
McGrigor, Mr Jamie (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
McIntosh, Mrs Lyndsay (Central Scotland) (Con)
Monteith, Mr Brian (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Mundell, David (South of Scotland) (Con)
Scott, John (Ayr) (Con)
Tosh, Mr Murray (South of Scotland) (Con)
Wallace, Ben (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Young, John (West of Scotland) (Con)

The Presiding Officer: The result of the division is: For 31, Against 64, Abstentions 15.

Amendment disagreed to.

The Presiding Officer: The next question is that amendment S1M-3078.2, in the name of Mary Scanlon, which seeks to amend motion S1M-3078, in the name of Malcolm Chisholm, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

Members: No.

The Presiding Officer: There will be a division.

FOR

Adam, Brian (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Aitken, Bill (Glasgow) (Con)
Campbell, Colin (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Canavan, Dennis (Falkirk West)
Cunningham, Roseanna (Perth) (SNP)
Douglas-Hamilton, Lord James (Lothians) (Con)
Ewing, Dr Winnie (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Fabiani, Linda (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Fergusson, Alex (South of Scotland) (Con)
Fraser, Murdo (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Gallie, Phil (South of Scotland) (Con)
Gibson, Mr Kenneth (Glasgow) (SNP)
Grahame, Christine (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Hamilton, Mr Duncan (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Harding, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Hyslop, Fiona (Lothians) (SNP)
Ingram, Mr Adam (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Johnstone, Alex (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Lochhead, Richard (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
MacAskill, Mr Kenny (Lothians) (SNP)
MacDonald, Ms Margo (Lothians) (SNP)
Marwick, Tricia (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Matheson, Michael (Central Scotland) (SNP)
McGrigor, Mr Jamie (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
McGugan, Irene (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
McIntosh, Mrs Lyndsay (Central Scotland) (Con)
McLeod, Fiona (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Monteith, Mr Brian (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Morgan, Alasdair (Galloway and Upper Nithsdale) (SNP)
Mundell, David (South of Scotland) (Con)
Neil, Alex (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Paterson, Mr Gil (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Quinan, Mr Lloyd (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Reid, Mr George (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Russell, Michael (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Scott, John (Ayr) (Con)
Sheridan, Tommy (Glasgow) (SSP)
Sturgeon, Nicola (Glasgow) (SNP)
Swinney, Mr John (North Tayside) (SNP)
Tosh, Mr Murray (South of Scotland) (Con)
Ullrich, Kay (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Wallace, Ben (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Welsh, Mr Andrew (Angus) (SNP)
Wilson, Andrew (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Young, John (West of Scotland) (Con)

AGAINST

Alexander, Ms Wendy (Paisley North) (Lab)
Baillie, Jackie (Dumbarton) (Lab)
Barrie, Scott (Dunfermline West) (Lab)
Boyack, Sarah (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
Brankin, Rhona (Midlothian) (Lab)
Brown, Robert (Glasgow) (LD)
Butler, Bill (Glasgow Anniesland) (Lab)
Chisholm, Malcolm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab)
Craigie, Cathie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab)
Curran, Ms Margaret (Glasgow Baillieston) (Lab)
Deacon, Susan (Edinburgh East and Musselburgh) (Lab)
Eadie, Helen (Dunfermline East) (Lab)
Ferguson, Patricia (Glasgow Maryhill) (Lab)
Finnie, Ross (West of Scotland) (LD)
Fitzpatrick, Brian (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)
Gorrie, Donald (Central Scotland) (LD)
Grant, Rhoda (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Gray, Iain (Edinburgh Pentlands) (Lab)
Henry, Hugh (Paisley South) (Lab)
Home Robertson, Mr John (East Lothian) (Lab)
Hughes, Janis (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab)
Jackson, Dr Sylvia (Stirling) (Lab)
Jackson, Gordon (Glasgow Govan) (Lab)
Jamieson, Cathy (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab)
Jenkins, Ian (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD)
Kerr, Mr Andy (East Kilbride) (Lab)
Lamont, Johann (Glasgow Pollok) (Lab)
Livingstone, Marilyn (Kirkcaldy) (Lab)
Lyon, George (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
Macdonald, Lewis (Aberdeen Central) (Lab)
Macintosh, Mr Kenneth (Eastwood) (Lab)
Maclean, Kate (Dundee West) (Lab)
Macmillan, Maureen (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Martin, Paul (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab)
McAllion, Mr John (Dundee East) (Lab)
McAveety, Mr Frank (Glasgow Shettleston) (Lab)
McCabe, Mr Tom (Hamilton South) (Lab)
McConnell, Mr Jack (Motherwell and Wishaw) (Lab)
McLeish, Henry (Central Fife) (Lab)
McMahon, Mr Michael (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab)
McNeil, Mr Duncan (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab)
McNeill, Pauline (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab)
McNulty, Des (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab)
Morrison, Mr Alasdair (Western Isles) (Lab)
Muldoon, Bristow (Livingston) (Lab)
Mulligan, Mrs Mary (Linlithgow) (Lab)
Munro, John Farquhar (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD)
Murray, Dr Elaine (Dumfries) (Lab)
Oldfather, Irene (Cunninghame South) (Lab)
Peacock, Peter (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Peattie, Cathy (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Radcliffe, Nora (Gordon) (LD)
Raffan, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (LD)
Robson, Euan (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD)
Rumbles, Mr Mike (West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine) (LD)
Simpson, Dr Richard (Ochil) (Lab)
Smith, Iain (North-East Fife) (LD)
Smith, Mrs Margaret (Edinburgh West) (LD)
Stephen, Nicol (Aberdeen South) (LD)
Stone, Mr Jamie (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
Thomson, Elaine (Aberdeen North) (Lab)
Wallace, Mr Jim (Orkney) (LD)
Watson, Mike (Glasgow Cathcart) (Lab)
Whitefield, Karen (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab)

ABSTENTIONS

Harper, Robin (Lothians) (Green)

The Presiding Officer: The result of the division is: For 45, Against 64, Abstentions 1.

Amendment disagreed to.

The Presiding Officer: The next question is that motion S1M-3078, in the name of Malcolm Chisholm, on action to recruit, retain and value nurses, be agreed to.

Motion agreed to.

That the Parliament pays tribute to the vital contribution made by all members of health care teams across Scotland but, in this International Nurses' Week, recognises the central role of nurses and midwives in delivering high quality patient care and supports the significant investment and action to recruit, retain and value nurses and midwives being delivered through Facing the Future and other initiatives.

The Presiding Officer: The fifth question is that motion S1M-3092, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on substitution to a committee, be agreed to.

Motion agreed to.

That the Parliament agrees that Karen Whitefield be the nominated committee substitute for the Labour Party on the Education, Culture and Sport Committee as permitted under Rule 6.3A.

The Presiding Officer: The sixth question is that motion S1M-3091, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, on committee membership, be agreed to.

Motion agreed to.

That the Parliament agrees that the following Members be appointed to Committees—

Cathy Peattie to replace Frank McAveety on the Education, Culture and Sport Committee;

Paul Martin to replace Frank McAveety on the Standards and the Procedures Committees;

Wendy Alexander to replace Angus MacKay on the Justice 1 Committee; and

Kenneth Gibson to replace Tricia Marwick on the Local Government Committee.

The Presiding Officer: The last question is that motion S1M-3089, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, on the designation of a lead committee, be agreed to.

Motion agreed to.

That the Parliament agrees that the Social Justice Committee is designated as lead committee in consideration of the Debt Arrangement and Attachment (Scotland) Bill and that the Justice 1 and 2 Committees and the Local Government Committee be secondary committees.

Europe Day

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): The final item of business today is a members' business debate on motion S1M-3032, in the name of Irene Oldfather, on Scotland and Europe day.

Motion debated,

That the Parliament is proud to mark Europe Day as a celebration of the founding of the European Union (EU); endorses the fundamental principles of the EU as set out in the Declaration by Robert Schuman on 9 May 1950; welcomes the contribution that the EU has made towards peace and solidarity across Europe; notes the relevance of the EU to the working of the Scottish Parliament and to the everyday lives of Scots, and encourages the people of Scotland, young and old, to join with citizens across Europe, in the celebration of our common values and to participate in the debate on the future of Europe.

17:05

Irene Oldfather (Cunninghame South) (Lab): This has been a very exciting day for the Parliament and I will say a little bit more about that in a moment. I thank the business managers of all parties in the Parliament—in the true spirit of European co-operation, they allowed the motion to be taken today by juggling other members' business debates.

On this day 52 years ago, the French foreign minister Robert Schuman made his groundbreaking speech and opened the debate with the words:

"World peace cannot be safeguarded without the making of creative efforts proportionate to the dangers which threaten it.

Europe will not be made all at once, or according to a single plan. It will be built through concrete achievements which first create ... solidarity."

The speech that advocated the regulation of coal and steel—the raw materials of war—led to collaboration for the first time in many years between France and Germany. To the great relief of Europe's people, conflict in Europe was replaced by economic co-operation.

That speech was the genesis of what we now know as the European Union and the origin of Europe day. I do not believe that Robert Schuman could have known when he made that speech on 9 May 1950 just how timeless and visionary his remarks would be. They are perhaps even more relevant today than they were then. We have had more than 50 years of peace in western Europe and the European Union's role in that must not be underestimated. It is important that we do not take that peace for granted.

A year ago in the Parliament we had a debate on Europe day and I called for us to stand together in the face of extremism in some parts of Europe. I ask that we be vigilant in regard to the emergence of racism and xenophobia among certain fanatics, such as Jörg Haider in Austria. As we celebrate Europe day it is important that we acknowledge what I believe are the common values and principles that decent-minded people in the Parliament and throughout Europe share, regardless of cultural diversity and political affiliation. Those principles are: our basic belief in democracy; our commitment to equality; our desire for better government and improvements in the principle of subsidiarity; our wish to promote opportunity for our people; and our yearning for peaceful co-existence.

The Scottish Parliament, as Europe's youngest Parliament, is keen to contribute to the debate on how the new Europe can affect our communities, our business and our people and how we can benefit from that engagement. It is difficult to imagine that only a few years ago, a day such as this would not have been possible. Today, we have opened our doors to hundreds of young people from schools throughout Scotland. We have an internet discussion group, which I hope citizens and interested parties throughout Europe will access.

Our debate today signals that, in the light of a changing and reforming agenda in Europe, we understand that Europe is relevant to our everyday lives.

Richard Lochhead (North-East Scotland) (SNP): Does Irene Oldfather agree that it is not just the duty of the Parliament to spread awareness of Europe throughout Scotland, but the duty of the Government?

Irene Oldfather: I absolutely agree with that and I am sure that the minister will take that point up in his summing-up.

Our Parliament has been the voice of Scotland today, celebrating with citizens throughout Europe. If anyone doubts the relevance of Europe to our everyday lives, I say to them that 63 per cent of our manufactured exports go to the EU. It is estimated that 350,000 jobs depend on commerce within the internal market. As we develop and expand that further, opportunities for enterprising companies will grow. The roll-on, roll-off ferry link, which for so long was only an aspiration, will later this month be a reality. I know that the full benefits of that will quickly be realised by Scottish business.

Not only has Scotland benefited from the single market and the social progress that EU membership has brought, but we are also well placed to benefit from the opportunities that enlargement will present. It is estimated that enlargement could mean an extra £175 million a year to the Scottish economy, but we must gear up to take advantage of it. The European Committee is linking up with the region of Sachsen-Anhalt in Germany, which has an innovative project with Estonia to link up German business to opportunities in the east. We are looking to become a partner and to learn from that experience.

We must also capitalise on our experience in the public administration and service sectors. Through the administration of the ECOS-Ouverture programme, Scotland made good connections with partner regions in Eastern Europe. Many of the candidate countries could benefit from Scottish expertise in drawing down structural funding and from a partnership approach to local economic development. Indeed, the European Commission has in the past described Scotland as a flagship performer. Those are the kind of concrete achievements that Schuman spoke of as the building blocks of solidarity 52 years ago.

I take the opportunity today to extend the hand of friendship from the Scottish Parliament to the candidate countries and to say, "Welcome. There has been much that has united us in the past and we look forward to extending our partnerships with you in the future." The nations and regions of Europe have a shared heritage as well as their own identity and, with that, a commitment to democracy and equality. The Scottish Parliament has a crucial role to play. By fulfilling our potential as a key player in the new Europe of the 21st century, we can leave to our people, our children and our grandchildren an inheritance of peace and prosperity. In those shared values lie our greatest strength.

17:12

Dr Winnie Ewing (Highlands and Islands) (SNP): I thank Irene Oldfather for getting this matter on the agenda. I spent 24 years in the European Parliament and, oddly enough, was nominated for the unelected Parliament by none other than Harold Wilson. I do not know whether he ever regretted that. I was then an elected member from 1979 until I came to the Scottish Parliament. I can hardly describe the enormous thrill I felt the first time I went into the European Parliament and saw the nations that had been at war all sitting not in nationalities but in political groupings. That thrill is still with me any time I even think about those experiences.

I was a child of the war with two brothers in great danger, one of whom was missing for three and a half years. Because we lived near a synagogue, there were at my school in Glasgow Jewish children who had been rescued from the gas ovens. To me, the war was the most dreadful thing. Throughout my childhood, my mother jumped when the doorbell rang. I became a passionate European because I could see that it was only by giving up some of our sovereignty together for joint purposes that we could possibly end war, which of course we have managed to do.

I am an enthusiastic European and that is how it will always be. I have seen enormous changes. The main change, I suppose, was the European Parliament's desire to acquire more powers. Enormous powers were added during my period there. The Parliament got powers of initiative, powers of compulsory consultation and powers to cross-examine the Commission, although it does not yet have power to select the commissioners.

When people used to tell me, "The European Parliament's just a talking shop" I used to get quite irritated. Who are we comparing it with? Certainly not with Westminster, where I also spent quite a number of years on two occasions. Rather, the European Parliament is a consensus Parliament. Our enemies being our Governments on the one hand and the Commission on the other hand, we tended to move together quite a lot on such matters as discrimination, human rights, the environment and the third world.

If we did not get our way, we raised the matter again a year later and started again with the same argument. We usually got our way. The European Parliament always gets its way in the end. We cannot say that about Westminster, because if a proposal is defeated in Westminster that is it for that session of Parliament. In Europe, one just waits a year and starts all over again.

One of my causes was a code of conduct for substandard tankers. I did not succeed the first time: I succeeded by getting enough supporters with other dangerous waters beside me with my dangerous waters in Shetland, Orkney and the Minch.

The initiative of which I am proudest is the Erasmus scheme. When I chaired the culture committee, we got the Erasmus scheme through. In that, I drew from Scottish experience, because we used to send our students to other universities throughout Europe, such as Bologna, Valladolid, Paris and Leiden. I just thought, "Why not dip into the Scottish experience and open it up for all European students?"

Glasgow became the city of culture when I was chairman of the culture committee, but I assure members that that was nothing to do with me—it was genuinely a decision by the English minister. It was to be Britain's turn to have the city of culture. Bath, Oxford, Glasgow and Edinburgh were in the running. Glasgow got it, the English minister said, because its policy was all about the future and the other cities were talking only about the past. We also got recognition of the deaf sign language of each EU member state through the Parliament. However, not all the countries have honoured that. Only three or four have done it, and Britain is not one of them.

In my opening speech in this Parliament, I urged that we follow the committee system of the European Parliament. I am happy to say that we have done that. Largely speaking, our committee system is the jewel of the Parliament. All parties are represented and everybody's contribution is valued if they have something interesting to contribute. That is the way that it is in Europe.

The criticisms of the secrecy of the councils of ministers that we always made in the European Parliament remain more or less unchanged. We had all sorts of practical plans, such as the chairman of the appropriate committee being allowed in when the appropriate subject was on the agenda, but we never got in.

On Britain's clout for Scotland, I disagree. Fishing is the example that springs to mind. In that and many other things, Britain is the country that keeps turning down European money because it will not match it. If Scotland were, as I want it to be, a normal member of the EU, Britain would actually have more votes.

17:18

Ben Wallace (North-East Scotland) (Con): Who could forget that it was a Conservative Government that took the United Kingdom into the Common Market in the early 1970s? Europe day, if any, is a time to reflect on how the EU and its development have been a political struggle in all parties in the UK. After all, Labour campaigned against membership in 1974 and even Tony Blair wanted to withdraw from Europe in 1983.

No one should claim the copyright on the EU or its institutions, nor should they be naive enough to believe that what is in favour with the electorate today will remain so for eternity. Until now, debate and argument on the future of Europe have been beneficial to its development. Member states have progressed treaty by treaty to where we are today, but we have never locked ourselves into commitments. That is at the heart of the debate on the future of Europe and its governance.

I was born at the time of Britain's entry negotiations. Having lived in many continental countries, I have no fear of Germans coming over the border or of French invasion, but I fear that the citizens of Europe are often left behind by political elites in the decision-making process. Most of us have seen the Europe day postcard with its symbol and the narrative on the back. It gives rise to the debate itself. It says that 9 May

"is an annual opportunity to celebrate the EU's achievements and reflect on its aims. Peace, freedom, prosperity and working together towards shared goals."

The last word in that quotation is what the debate is about. The challenge for us is to define those goals. Most of the public are not consulted on or aware of what those goals should be. I think that Europe is at that crossroads once again this year.

My party and I believe that the goal should be a wider, looser Europe, with the values of subsidiarity and diversification at its heart, and that the best way to bring Europe back to its citizens is to devolve power and decisions back to them. That is not best achieved by going over the collective heads of member states' Parliaments.

Other parties are open about their opinions, too. The European Committee heard evidence from Andrew Duff, the Liberal Democrat MEP who is also head of the federalist group. In the convention on the future of Europe, he pushes openly for the plan that he believes in: a federal Europe. That subject is open to debate and such views have been honestly put forward.

My belief, of course, is that although a federal system would theoretically allow a more direct route between citizen, elected MEP and, perhaps, European president, it would come at the expense of the nation state.

Irene Oldfather referred to the terrible rise of nationalism, which I think is a symptom of citizens' feeling frustrated and left out of the decision-making processes. Who can forget the Irish people's refusal of the Nice treaty? It struck all of us who visited Brussels that the EU Commission carried on regardless. We cannot ignore the people of different parts of Europe who are expressing their dissatisfaction with some of the things that are dealt with by European policy makers.

If the EU ignores the people of Europe and carries on regardless, people will feel more and more alienated—which is what has contributed to the scandalous rise of nationalism in recent years. Whatever we secure for the future of Europe, we must ensure that it is in touch with people and that people in this and other countries are consulted more often about the future direction of Europe.

Today, however, is an opportunity to reflect on the good things the EU has brought us: security, better trade, better culture and integration. Let us celebrate the fact that—hopefully—my generation will, as a result of the existence of the EU, not experience the wars that killed so many in the past.

I am pleased to support the motion, and so is my party.

17:22

Mr Keith Raffan (Mid Scotland and Fife) (LD): I congratulate Irene Oldfather on securing the debate. She is absolutely right to say that first the European Coal and Steel Community, then the European Economic Community and now the European Union have made a massive contribution to peace on the continent: the longest period of peace in western European history. In particular, they have brought an end to Franco-German hostility, which erupted in three major wars between 1870 and 1945: the Franco-Prussian war, the first world war and the second world war.

As well as an unprecedented period of peace, the European Union has brought unprecedented prosperity and led to the spread of European democracy. I was fortunate enough to spend Christmas 1989 in Prague at the height of the velvet revolution and to hear Václav Havel's first speech as President of Czechoslovakia. That new year's eve I was at the Berlin wall when, to the astonishment of everybody and for the first time, the East German guards allowed people to pass freely between east Berlin and west Berlin.

That spread of European democracy is now leading to the enlargement of the Community, to the widening of the European Union's membership. It is also leading to the deepening of the Community. I hope that it will not be long before we join the euro. We in the United Kingdom should have learned by now that, by joining late, we had little say in how the Community first formed. Now, we may have little say in the way the single currency is managed.

I hope that this debate will stimulate a wider one in Scotland as a whole. More than 100 of the 129 members of the Parliament belong to parties that are committed to eventual entry into the single currency. That does not mean, however, that that view is reflected among the electorate. It is incumbent on us all to take a lead in the national debate that is to come.

I do not want to rehearse the arguments in detail, but I profoundly believe that membership of a single currency is in the economic interest of Scotland. It would free Scottish firms from damaging currency fluctuations and eliminate transaction costs. It would lead to lower interest rates and to greater price transparency—and so to increased consumer power and many lower priced goods. It would safeguard more than 300,000 Scottish jobs that depend on trade with Europe. It would protect inward investment. It would safeguard and strengthen Britain's financial sector, not least here in Edinburgh, which manages the fourth largest sum of international funds—£160 billion—after London, Paris and Frankfurt. I agree with my colleague Chris Huhne—a much more distinguished expert on the single currency than me; he was formerly a distinguished financial journalist and is now an MEP—who undertook an inquiry into the single currency on behalf of our federal party leader, Charles Kennedy. The inquiry concluded that

"the UK Government's inaction on the euro is partly to blame for the damaging overvaluation of the pound."

The sooner we have a clearer lead from the UK Government the better, but that should not prevent Scotland taking a lead.

Just over 30 years ago, while perched precariously at the base of Nelson's column, I made my one and only speech in Trafalgar Square. I was there with such distinguished Conservatives—there was such a thing as a Conservative group for Europe then—as Kenneth Clarke, Hugh Dykes and Chris Patten. Many of them are now colleagues in the Liberal Democrats.

David Mundell (South of Scotland) (Con): No they are not.

Mr Raffan: I said that many of them are, but there are more to come. Foolish men will be swept away—particularly those on my right.

A week tomorrow I will be in Rosyth to see the first sailing of the Superfast ferry to Zeebrugge, which will open up a direct sea link to Europe. Earlier this afternoon I was with pupils of Coupar Angus Primary School, who were here to learn about Europe and Scotland's place in it. I told them that when I was their age—they are 10 or 11—I was not as lucky as they are because we were not part of Europe as we are now. The future of Europe is not only about our future but, much more important, theirs.

17:26

Richard Lochhead (North-East Scotland) (SNP): I, too, congratulate Irene Oldfather on helping the Parliament to mark Europe day through this evening's debate. I pay special tribute to Winnie Ewing, who is Scotland's best link with Europe. If Sean Connery is Scotland's most famous film star, Winnie Ewing is certainly Scotland's most famous European. I know that they are good friends and I am thankful that both happen to be members of the SNP. The Parliament can draw on Winnie's experience and wisdom in European matters, as the SNP often does.

I welcome the debate especially because it shows that Parliament is marking Europe day. I only wish that the Scottish Government—or indeed, the UK Government—had gone out of its way to try to mark Europe day, but that has not been the case. I understand that the First Minister had a photo call today and that he will attend a reception organised by the European Commission this evening, but that is the extent of the Scottish Executive's involvement in Europe day. That is quite disappointing.

Before I came to the Parliament this morning, I listened to the BBC. The BBC talked about the English team in the world cup, Arsenal winning the English league and the Queen's jubilee, but it did not mention once that today is Europe day. That is disappointing, but the Scottish media are no better. As we all know, some of the Scottish papers have withdrawn from attempting to cover European matters in any detail. I hope that the Parliament can express the view to the media that they should do more to raise awareness of European issues throughout Scotland.

Irene Oldfather: The member will no doubt be interested to know that this afternoon's "Newsdrive" has covered Europe day.

Richard Lochhead: I am delighted to hear that. One can always trust the BBC's "Newsdrive".

Last week, I started to read Primo Levi's "If This Is A Man", which is the author's story of how he spent the last year of the second world war in a work camp near Auschwitz. As I was reading the book and thinking of today's debate, I thought that that book should serve as a reminder of why we are in Europe in the first place. The European Communities were founded to maintain peace in Europe and to spread democracy and tolerance throughout the continent. That should put all the other complaints about Europe into perspective. We should never lose sight of that fact.

However, the reality is that many people in Scotland think that the European institutions are remote and out of touch with opinion on the ground. One need only look at the common agricultural policy, which has spent billions of pounds, yet Scotland and Europe now have fewer farmers, who have less income. Similarly, we have hundreds of regulations under the common fisheries policy, yet Europe now has fewer fishermen and smaller fish stocks.

It is important that Scotland have a voice in Europe. As the motion says, we need to participate in the European debate. However, Scotland is missing from the convention on the future of Europe. Scotland's political leader, Jack McConnell, has no higher status than rapporteur to the Committee of the Regions, which itself has only observer status. Other small nations in Europe, such as Denmark, are at the heart of the debate over the future of Europe. Those countries have influence, but the Scottish Government does not use what little influence it has.

In conclusion, if we want to make our vision of Europe a reality, we need real influence in the heart of Europe. That means that, one day, we will need to celebrate not only Europe day, but independence in Europe day.

17:29

David Mundell (South of Scotland) (Con): I congratulate Irene Oldfather not only on today's debate, but on her boundless enthusiasm in promoting Europe. Although many of my colleagues and I do not always agree with everything that she says about Europe or with all aspects of her vision for the future, I admire the way in which she has pursued the issue. I regret that, although I had the pleasure of Mr Hugh Henry's distinctive convenership of the European Committee, I did not last the course—because the number of members was cut—to have the benefit of Irene Oldfather's convenership, which I am sure is equally distinctive.

I agree with one of Keith Raffan's comments—that an intelligent and coherent debate about Europe and Scotland's role in Europe is needed. I disagree with his views on the euro. It is clear that people can support being in Europe and being part of the European Union while not being in favour of the euro. To oppose the euro does not make one anti-European. One great progression of the past year or so is that we can move away from the viewpoint that being against the euro means being against Europe as a whole.

That discussion of issues is needed. The EU needs to develop and learn. It could learn from the Parliament. Recently, I had two very different experiences. One was with the Parliament, when the Rural Development Committee travelled to Dalry in Galloway to take evidence from people in rural Scotland about rural integration. That was a professionally managed event, in which the public were free to participate. I also attended the EU's allegedly public hearing into foot-and-mouth disease, which—for some bizarre reason—took place in a cafe in Gretna. Fifty EU personnel and three farmers were present at that hearing. That did not create a favourable impression among the population.

The other part of the debate, which we discussed when I was a member of the European Committee, is the need not to view Europe as a cash provider to Scotland. We must make serious adjustments. I know that the minister is aware of issues in relation to the common agricultural policy. We often talk about structural funding. An area such as Dumfries and Galloway may well receive £4 million in structural funding, but we receive £60 million a year in CAP funding. If we do not start to make preparations and do not understand that that funding basis will change, we will be in serious difficulty. However, at least the European Committee and debates such as today's provide the opportunity to discuss and examine the issue. On that basis, I have pleasure in welcoming and supporting the motion.

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Mr George Reid): Several members have added their names during the debate to the list of members who wish to speak. I am about five minutes short, so although I will accept a motion without notice to extend the debate until 6 o'clock, I expect the debate to finish five or 10 minutes before then.

Motion moved,

That, under Rule 8.14.3, the debate be extended until 6.00 pm.—[Irene Oldfather.]

Motion agreed to.

17:34

Mr Lloyd Quinan (West of Scotland) (SNP): I thank Irene Oldfather, who is the convener of the European Committee, for securing the debate. She always keeps an eye on such anniversaries, which keeps the rest of us in line. That is nice to know.

I am entirely pro-European Union, but we live in an interesting time in the EU's development. Members have touched on some of the issues. The current and most important issue in the EU for me as a citizen and as a member of a political party is the development of the constitutional convention on the future of Europe, which will give us a new passport with a new message on its inside page.

The convention will also affect our individual and collective rights in many ways. However, my fear is that because, in effect, centre-right Governments control the big five member states, their influence will affect personal and individual freedom issues and make legal frameworks more draconian than is necessary. I cite in evidence of that the behaviour of Aznar's Spanish Government toward nationalists in the Basque country, where large youth organisations, social organisations and the largest radical political party have been declared terrorist organisations.

Today, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office has led me to believe that on the advice of the Spanish Government, the British Government will add all those organisations to the list of terrorist organisations that was issued in 2000. I find that deeply worrying, because I am a member of an organisation that has been declared a terrorist organisation. The organisation in question provides food, succour and comfort to political prisoners in the Basque country. To be frank, I am no terrorist and neither are the people who run that organisation.

Does the minister agree that the constant extension of the list of outlawed organisations and political groupings in no way advances democracy in Europe? The constitutional convention should be the focus—the crucible—for the development of a genuine and truthful democracy and for the creation of a Europe of the peoples, not a Europe of the nation states. I make those comments because several members have said that Britain and Europe have been at peace since the formation of the European Union, but that is not true. It is not true within the boundaries of the United Kingdom, within the boundaries of Italy or within the boundaries of Spain.

It is a false concept to pretend that the only benefit of the EU has been to prevent a major war between France and Germany. The EU has made it possible for people around the world to carry out extremely brutal and vicious wars. The second, third and fourth-largest arms producers in the world are European companies with Government involvement. We might not be experiencing war on our own soil, but we export it daily.

The most important issue for us as Scots and as people who carry a UK passport is whether Britain will get into Europe or whether it will continue with its semi-detached approach, which is exemplified by the British Government's failure to agree with the EU measures against the state of Israel for its occupation of Palestinian territories. Are we going to be in Europe or are we going to be the 51st state? We cannot be both. I suggest that to become truly European, Europe needs to stop talking about the euro and peace and needs to talk about the development of democracy and the possibility of carrying a unified European passport that allows travel and the protection of law in all member countries and in the countries that will accede to the EU.

17:38

Helen Eadie (Dunfermline East) (Lab): I, too, pay tribute to Irene Oldfather for so skilfully securing a debate on Europe day on 9 May. It is a delight to work with Irene, with our colleagues on the European Committee and with our minister.

I have no doubt that my colleagues in the Executive—particularly Peter Peacock, whom I knew in a previous incarnation, when we had interesting times in carrying out European work in local government—have a powerful commitment to working in Europe. I know that Henry McLeish and his successor, Jack McConnell, have always been determined to ensure that the people of Scotland get the best out of Europe and that we contribute to Europe in the best way. I am proud to be part of a team that is helping to develop that work.

I agree with Keith Raffan—for once—that among the many things about Europe that we can celebrate is the fact that next week we will have the Rosyth-Zeebrugge ferry. The setting up of that service was an example of genuine co-operation at local government level. The name that is often given to local government in the Parliament impugns the integrity of local government officials. We should remember that local government brought members such as Peter Peacock and other celebrated individuals into the Parliament.

We should recognise local government officials' value and their contribution. My colleagues in Fife Council have continued an initiative that was started away back in the days of the North Sea Commission—which Peter Peacock will know very well. The ferry is a tremendous example of what good co-operation and collaboration can bring to the people of Scotland and I am delighted to be part of it. It opens up opportunities for business and tourism. I will really celebrate next week when we help to launch the service as the ship sails from Rosyth. I hope that it will be a success and that people will realise the opportunities that it offers.

Keith Raffan is right to say that we will have to show some leadership on the euro. Winnie Ewing was the one who convinced me about the euro on a television programme. She might remember it: she said that she was going to be given hospitality in Spain and that, to get there, she would be going through four countries, in each of which she would have to spend money. When she came back to Scotland she said that she had not spent very much money in any of the countries that she had travelled through and that she had been given lots of hospitality. She said that she had had £400—or however much it was—in her pocket but that all of it had gone on commission and bank charges.

Ben Wallace: Will the member give way?

Helen Eadie: I am on my last two seconds.

When the people of Scotland go on their summer holidays this year and start to use euros, they will really understand the difference that the euro can bring. They will save money but it will cost the banks. Hallelujah!

17:42

Nora Radcliffe (Gordon) (LD): I endorse wholeheartedly every word of Irene Oldfather's motion. I would also like to record my appreciation for the power of work that a number of people did to organise school visits today. Eurodesk, Young Scot and the Scottish youth parliament were the youth organisations involved, together with the offices in Scotland of the European Commission and the European Parliament. We should not forget our own staff and the teachers who came with the children. Primary school children from all over Scotland have been in and around the Parliament today, helping us to celebrate Europe day. It was great for many reasons. The kids whom I met this morning were great—some of them got up at 5 o'clock in the morning to get here. It is good to see youngsters being interested and getting involved in what I might describe as the civic responsibility of being Scots and being Europeans. What makes Governments work, and what keeps politicians honest, is an involved and interested electorate. Those young people are the electorate and, indeed, the politicians, of the future.

They have a lot to teach the people and the politicians of the present. I was impressed by some of the suggestions made by the group that I was with. One especially imaginative suggestion was that school pupils from different European countries should go on joint school trips. Now, I might have thought of that, but the added twist was that the trip should be to a country that was abroad for both groups.

Other youngsters advocated e-penfriends, to help them learn the language of their counterparts in other countries. The group that I spent time with were not only definitely pro-euro but understood why they held that view.

I will not use the debate as an occasion for a political speech, but as an opportunity to celebrate the fact that an organisation that was born five years after the destruction and bloodshed of the second major war of the 20th century in Europe had ended has been a factor in the political stability and the continuing peace that we enjoy in western Europe. The organisation has gone from strength to strength. The membership has grown from the original six to the current 15 and it is set to grow still further. Its role, its structures and its way of working have changed along the way. It has given us peace, prosperity and the enrichment of having closer relationships with cultures other than our own.

For me, the main raison d'être of the Scottish Parliament, the European Union and in particular the European Parliament is the same—better government. It is common sense to deal with some issues co-operatively on a wider than national basis. It is also common sense to devolve power to the nearest practicable level to the citizen. We have benefited greatly, and in many ways, from our membership of the EU. There are obvious physical benefits, such as roads and bridges, and various other projects that would not have happened without European funding.

I want to celebrate the fact that the EU has been particularly effective in driving forward action on two fronts that are dear to my heart: equality and the environment. I am delighted to speak in this debate and to contribute to the celebrations. I am pleased to be able to say with enthusiasm: vive l'Europe!

17:45

Irene McGugan (North-East Scotland) (SNP): I am pleased that the consultative steering group looked to Europe in establishing our Parliament. We are elected proportionally using the same constituency list system as Germany. Like most of Europe, our business is determined collectively in a bureau. For internal appointments we use the d'Hondt system, which was invented by a Belgian. We have electronic voting and we sit in the classic European hemicycle.

As the motion states, there are close working links between the EU and the Scottish Parliament. The Scottish Parliament and its committees are interested in many of the same subject areas as the EU. I believe that there is no subject committee in the Scottish Parliament in whose subject the EU does not also have an interest. I have experienced that on a personal level, because I am a member of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee of the Scottish Parliament and, as a member of the Committee of the Regions, I sit on the Commission for Culture and Education. The overlap and added value is very useful.

Members of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee have just begun to get regular information about the work programme of the European Culture, Youth, Education, Media and Sport Committee. That is very helpful because our committee—and all committees of the Scottish Parliament—should be aware of EU policies and legislation as early as possible so that we can consider their impact on Scotland and influence Scottish and UK ministers if appropriate.

The motion also highlights the fact that the EU has a major impact on the everyday lives of people in Scotland. However, there is a lot of work to do to raise awareness of that and of what each EU institution does. I was sent the latest edition of the Eurobarometer, which charts public awareness of all EU bodies, including the Committee of the Regions. The figures are improving, but they are still not very good. When people were asked whether they had ever heard of the Committee of the Regions, only 31 per cent said yes, while 61 per cent said no—I do not know what happened to the other 8 per cent. Worst of all, the country with the highest awareness of the Committee of the Regions was Portugal, with 54 per cent, but the lowest awareness was in the United Kingdom, with 15 per cent. It has been suggested that not until we have a long-running storyline in "Coronation Street" in which Ken Barlow decides to run for the presidency of the Committee of the Regions, will we improve on those figures. I will finish by making a huge cultural leap from Ken Barlow to Jean Monnet, the founding father of the European Community. He said:

"men and women who are placed in new circumstances or are subject to a new set of obligations, adapt their behaviour and become different. If the new context is better, they themselves become better."

I am sure that we all hope that that will be the case for both Scotland and Europe, now and in the future.

17:49

The Deputy Minister for Finance and Public Services (Peter Peacock): As Irene Oldfather and other members have said, today is a day for celebrating a remarkable achievement and the vision and commitment of our forebears in setting the foundations for the modern European Union. As Winnie Ewing and other members have said, the EU came about from the aftermath of two hugely destructive wars in the first half of the last century and stemmed from a commitment to ensure that that never happened again. Those are the origins of the European Union.

It is to Robert Schuman's eternal credit that, on this day in 1950, he took those first historic steps and called for Europe to move forward. That is still relevant today. Old enemies began to work together to resolve disputes, rather than going to war, which had been the tradition in Europe prior to that. It is fitting that Irene Oldfather has managed to coincide today's debate with the exact day of Schuman's speech in 1950.

I have made it clear before in this chamber that I am an unashamed enthusiast for Europe, in the way that Winnie Ewing described. I believe that the development of the European Union is one of the most remarkable achievements of our history. Winnie Ewing described when she first went to the European Parliament. I remember when I first walked into the European Parliament hemicycle, when I was a member of the European Committee of the Regions. I was with several hundred people who were doing the same job that I was—I was a council leader—but they were from all over Europe. I remember thinking that only 50 or 60 years before the same people were at war, lobbing shells at each other and causing massive destruction. The fact that we have moved forward in the way that we have is impressive by any standard.

The achievements of the European Union are set to continue with its impending enlargement. The EU has contributed enormously to peace and security in Europe. It has also contributed to many other areas of the day-to-day lives of our communities: to business; to the creation of jobs and trade; to fighting international crime; and to a cleaner environment, which members, in particular Nora Radcliffe, have talked about. All of that has been built upon a common marketplace for goods and services and a vibrant European economy.

But the EU is much more than just an economic phenomenon. It is the only trading bloc in the world that has an explicit policy to bring about economic and social cohesion and solidarity among the members of the European Union, wherever people are within the Union. The EU is about working together in partnership to make Europe a more harmonious place, which is better balanced, cleaner, more prosperous and safer for all the peoples of Europe. The members of the European Union are much stronger together than they were apart, prior to the Union's creation.

As a number of members have said, despite all the positive aspects of the European Union, challenges face it at present. Ben Wallace and Richard Lochhead touched on that. The view of the union is changing in parts of Europe. Part of the reason for that is that people believe the union to be distant from the citizen. A lot of work is going on to address that.

Richard Lochhead: The minister will appreciate that one of the debates on the future of Europe is about where executive power should lie, that is, whether it should lie with the European Parliament or the European Commission. What is the Scottish Executive's view on that?

Peter Peacock: I will draw some of those points out as I proceed.

The forthcoming enlargement of the EU, which we support strongly, will increase the population of the EU by approximately 130 million people, but it will also open up huge opportunities for Scotland in trade and development. Enlargement has the potential to make the institutions and the workings of the EU seem even more complex and distant from the people, who already perceive the EU to be distant. That has led to the current debate on the future governance of Europe.

The EU is a complex, interwoven, multi-layered democracy. It has two or three layers of local government which—in particular on the continent—are built around communal government and power being passed to regional and state governments. The EU also has sub-member state administrations, either with legislative powers or purely administrative powers, member state governments and the European Parliament itself. The machinery of the EU is extremely complex, and includes the Council of Ministers, the European Commission, the European Parliament, the European Economic and Social Committee, the Committee of the Regions, and the European Court of Justice among others.

Scotland has strong representation in the EU at all levels of decision making—through the UK Parliament, via the UK Government, through the Executive directly into institutions and in the European Parliament itself.

Richard Lochhead: Will the minister give way?

Peter Peacock: I wish to make progress.

Scotland has influence in the European Economic and Social Committee and in the Committee of the Regions. It also has influence in lobby groups around the European Parliament and the European Commission, for example the Conference of Peripheral Maritime Regions. In that context, Scotland is represented at the top table of all institutions and groups in Europe. Scotland punches well above its weight in the European context. It has the twin benefits—and I disagree with Winnie Ewing on this point—of being part of one of the strongest member states, that is the UK, while at the same time it has access to every level of the Union's decision making.

I regret that Richard Lochhead, unlike others, brought a discordant tone to the debate with regard to powers. He mentioned that the First Minister was making a contribution to the European debate today. In addition, this debate is taking place and I am going up to Inverness to speak on behalf of the Executive at a debate on European matters.

Richard Lochhead: The minister talked about Scotland punching above its weight in Europe. Scotland should be punching above its weight in the Council of Ministers. Under the devolved set-up, how many meetings of the Council of Ministers has the Scottish Executive been represented at this year?

Peter Peacock: That question shows that Richard Lochhead fails to grasp the crafted analysis that I am trying to make. The Executive is represented at all levels of the European Union. Scotland is represented in the UK Government and the issue therefore does not arise.

Securing a new Europe requires a partnership where Government at all levels, whether it is the UK, EU, the Scottish Executive, our MEPs or local government, works closely together with the trade unions, the business community and the voluntary sector to respond to the challenges that Europe faces. That partnership has to continue to develop and build on the huge progress that has been made to date.

Our aim is to make the European Union more open, coherent, effective, accountable and relevant to the ordinary men and women of Europe. As part of its principles, the EU should be committed to subsidiarity. As others have mentioned, the Scottish Parliament and the Executive have a role to play in the process of helping to bring about greater understanding, participation and benefits from the European Union.

Ben Wallace rose—

The Deputy Presiding Officer: No. The minister must wind up.

Peter Peacock: We want to secure a Europe that is genuinely closer to the citizen and that enables us all to benefit from European growth. As others mentioned, I am sure that the Scottish Parliament will welcome the fact that the First Minister will draft the Committee of the Regions' main opinion paper on the reform of the treaty. I would like to return to the Schuman declaration, which is referred to in Irene Oldfather's motion. In its time, the declaration was visionary. It was a declaration that was incredibly far-sighted and creative. We are here to celebrate the achievement of that vision, which is the creation of the European Union and the priceless benefits that it has brought to the people of Scotland. The Executive fully supports the sentiments expressed in the motion lodged by Irene Oldfather.

Meeting closed at 17:56.

Session 1 (2002)

Scottish Parliament
Official Report

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

5 December 2002

CONTENTS

Thursday 5 December 2002

Debates

BUILDING (SCOTLAND) BILL: STAGE 1
Motion moved—[Ms Margaret Curran].
The Minister for Social Justice (Ms Margaret Curran)
Linda Fabiani (Central Scotland) (SNP)
John Scott (Ayr) (Con)
Nora Radcliffe (Gordon) (LD)
Bristow Muldoon (Livingston) (Lab)
Fiona McLeod (West of Scotland) (SNP)
John Farquhar Munro (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD)
Mr Kenny MacAskill (Lothians) (SNP)
Mr Kenneth Macintosh (Eastwood) (Lab)
Colin Campbell (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Rhona Brankin (Midlothian) (Lab)
Robert Brown (Glasgow) (LD)
Murdo Fraser (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Mr Kenneth Gibson (Glasgow) (SNP)
The Deputy Minister for Social Justice (Des McNulty)
BUILDING (SCOTLAND) BILL: FINANCIAL RESOLUTION
Motion moved—[Peter Peacock].
CRIMINAL JUSTICE BILL
Motion moved—[Hugh Henry].
The Deputy Minister for Justice (Hugh Henry)
Michael Matheson (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Bill Aitken (Glasgow) (Con)
George Lyon (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
Brian Fitzpatrick (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)
Phil Gallie (South of Scotland) (Con)
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton (Lothians) (Con)
Christine Grahame (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Hugh Henry
CRIME (INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION) BILL
Motion moved—[Hugh Henry].
The Deputy Minister for Justice (Hugh Henry)
Michael Matheson (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton (Lothians) (Con)
George Lyon (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
Pauline McNeill (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab)
Phil Gallie (South of Scotland) (Con)
Christine Grahame (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Hugh Henry
BUSINESS MOTION
Motion moved—[Euan Robson]—and agreed to.
The Deputy Minister for Parliamentary Business (Euan Robson)
QUESTION TIME
SCOTTISH EXECUTIVE
Community Care Services
Dental Services (Borders)
European Funding (Highlands and Islands)
European Funding (Highlands and Islands)
Haddock Fishing
Livestock Auction Markets
NHS 24
Public-private Partnerships (Hospitals)
Recycling
Ritalin
Sex Offenders
Transport Infrastructure (Ayrshire)
FIRST MINISTER'S QUESTION TIME
Cabinet (Meetings)
Creutzfeld-Jakob Disease
Dangerous Cargoes
National Theatre
Racist Attacks
Secretary of State for Scotland (Meetings)
FUTURE OF EUROPE CONVENTION
Motion moved—[Mr Jim Wallace].
Amendment moved—[Fiona Hyslop].
Amendment moved—[Ben Wallace].
The Deputy First Minister and Minister for Justice (Mr Jim Wallace)
Fiona Hyslop (Lothians) (SNP)
Ben Wallace (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Irene Oldfather (Cunninghame South) (Lab)
Dr Winnie Ewing (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Sarah Boyack (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
John Young (West of Scotland) (Con)
Colin Campbell (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Helen Eadie (Dunfermline East) (Lab)
Mr Jamie Stone (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
Mr Kenny MacAskill (Lothians) (SNP)
Mr John Home Robertson (East Lothian) (Lab)
Phil Gallie (South of Scotland) (Con)
Irene McGugan (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Mr Jim Wallace
PARLIAMENTARY BUREAU MOTIONS
Motions moved—[Euan Robson].
DECISION TIME
OSTEOPOROSIS
Motion debated—[Fergus Ewing].
Fergus Ewing (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP)
Maureen Macmillan (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Michael Matheson (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Mary Scanlon (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Stewart Stevenson (Banff and Buchan) (SNP)
Nora Radcliffe (Gordon) (LD)
Fiona Hyslop (Lothians) (SNP)
The Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care (Mr Frank McAveety)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

5 December 2002
Scottish Parliament

Thursday 5 December 2002

[THE DEPUTY PRESIDING OFFICER opened the meeting at 09:30]

Building (Scotland) Bill: Stage 1

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Mr Murray Tosh): Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S1M-3410, in the name of Margaret Curran, on the general principles of the Building (Scotland) Bill.

09:30

The Minister for Social Justice (Ms Margaret Curran): I am pleased to open the debate on the Building (Scotland) Bill. The bill is an important piece of legislation that will establish the new building standards system that will be our means of protecting the health, safety, welfare and convenience of anyone in Scotland who uses a building—that is quite a few of us. As an indication of building standards' pervasiveness, new building in Scotland is estimated to be worth about £5 billion each year. As a whole, the built environment in Scotland is valued at approximately £600 billion. All of us who use buildings have an interest in ensuring that a robust building standards system is in place for the future.

The bill's purpose is to bring up to date the building control system that has done a good job of delivering the requirements of the Building (Scotland) Act 1959. The bill will replace the 1959 act and it will also facilitate the implementation of the construction products directive, which is a European single market provision.

Much of the bill and the administrative systems and processes that will flow from it are technical. I repeat our thanks to all those involved in the construction sector who contributed to our various consultations in the past three years. Their advice was invaluable in ensuring that we were able present to the Parliament proposals that have broad support throughout the sector. I am grateful to the Transport and the Environment Committee for commending the inclusive approach that the Executive took during the development of the proposals. I am pleased to welcome Des McNulty, who will close the debate. As a former member of that committee, he is very knowledgeable about the bill.

The bill establishes the framework for a reformed building standards system. Many of its features, such as the core process of building warrants and completion certificates, are similar to the features of the existing structure. We seek evolution rather than revolution. We are building on what works and making changes to meet existing and future needs.

Part 1 establishes a framework for ministers to make building regulations. It will include for the first time a power for ministers to make building regulations to further the achievement of sustainable development. It will continue to ensure that building regulations will be able to cover the usability of buildings and their accessibility by all.

The system that part 1 will introduce will be more flexible than the existing system and will allow owners to adopt more innovative approaches to building. However, it will ensure that current standards are maintained and that, as regulations are updated, standards are improved. Part 1 will introduce the building standards assessment, which will be a useful tool in identifying whether a building complies with regulations and the extent of any unauthorised works.

Part 2 describes the warrant and completion certificate process and introduces the concept of a verifier. Verifiers will work in the public interest to scrutinise work that has been done. As people know, that is a local authority function, but the bill provides that ministers may appoint other organisations, including those from the private sector, to undertake that role.

That matter was of particular concern to the Transport and the Environment Committee and was the subject of detailed discussions with many stakeholders. We agree with the position that the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Scottish Association of Chief Building Control Officers took when they gave evidence to the committee. Like them, we want any organisation that may undertake the verification role to satisfy the criteria of impartiality, transparency, accountability and consistency.

The Scottish Association of Chief Building Control Officers accepted that there was no reason why private sector verifiers should not be introduced at some stage, provided that there was a level playing field and that the private sector was required to meet the same criteria as local authorities were. The association said that the difficulty would lie in making guidelines and monitoring rigid enough. The Transport and the Environment Committee recommended that the Executive make a firm commitment not to introduce private sector verifiers until a full study had been undertaken into their potential impact. I am happy to give the committee that undertaking and to agree that the study will involve consultation with local authorities.

In its evidence to the Transport and the Environment Committee, the association accepted that, subject to those safeguards, the introduction of private sector verifiers might offer advantages for the public, in particular in turnaround times for applications and the flexibility of service delivery to the applicant.

The committee made a significant point about the accessibility of information on building standards registers. We are happy to undertake to make all reasonable efforts to ensure that building standards registers are accessible to all users, which includes having relevant parts of the register translated on request within a reasonable time scale. However, as the committee said in its report, we are keen that the requirements imposed on local authorities should not be overly burdensome.

Part 3 deals with enforcement powers. In particular, it introduces a provision on building regulations compliance, which offers ministers the power to require the compliance of existing buildings with building regulations. That provision is made in expectation of the need to meet another European directive on the use of energy in buildings. The directive will insist that the energy efficiency of large existing buildings is upgraded whenever other substantial works are planned.

Part 4 deals with defective and dangerous buildings and is similar to existing legislation on those matters. However, it provides that a local authority will be able to enter and inspect a building to see whether it is dangerous. That is an extension of the existing power that allows a local authority to enter a building only if it has reasonable cause to believe that the building is dangerous. That policy was developed following the outcome of the fatal accident inquiry into the tragic death of Christine Foster at Ryan's Bar in Edinburgh.

Part 5 deals with general issues. Of note is the provision that gives ministers the power to undertake any of the functions of a local authority. Ministers may direct local authorities on how they exercise their functions; a similar power in relation to verifiers will be introduced by part 2. Those powers will assist the Executive to ensure consistency of application throughout Scotland, meeting one of the wishes of many key stakeholders from the public and the private sectors. The bill will also bind the Crown.

The bill is important. It will help to underpin cross-cutting issues, such as sustainable development and the reduction of fuel poverty, and will be an important tool in ensuring the continuing health and safety of the people of Scotland. We look forward to detailed consideration at stage 2.

I move,

That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Building (Scotland) Bill.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I call Linda Fabiani.

09:37

Linda Fabiani (Central Scotland) (SNP): You caught me on the hop, Presiding Officer. The minister's speech was incredibly short; she did not even speak quickly.

The SNP welcomes the bill's general policy objectives, many of which are long overdue, such as the objectives of providing greater reassurance for people who use tradespeople and of providing more information to house buyers. The consensus is that local authority powers to identify dangerous buildings should be strengthened, that designers thrive on flexibility and innovation and that the system should be more responsive to the needs of the public and industry. The SNP is always up for providing excellence in public services, encouraging sustainable development and being constructive in helping the Executive to meet its obligations under European directives.

The main purpose of the bill is to modernise Scotland's building control system. That modernisation must have a robust base, with credible enforcement powers to reflect a basic need for accountability and competence. I am concerned that the policy objectives to which I referred, as outlined in the policy memorandum, have not been reflected in the bill's long title, which is

"to make further provision with respect to buildings, building standards, work in relation to buildings and related matters; and for connected purposes."

Many others share those concerns and I ask the minister to consider them further as the bill progresses, so that it can be strengthened to ensure that it is objective driven rather than process driven.

I do not have time to dissect every element of the bill, but I will raise some particular points. As I said, the provisions on dangerous buildings are welcome, but we should note the evidence of the Fire Protection Association, whose representative said that the bill would not give fire authorities a statutory right to be consulted. Their expertise would be brought into play only if there were variations from technical standards. That is a potential amendment for the Executive to consider.

I am reminded of the licensing scheme for houses in multiple occupation, on which the Social Justice Committee has taken much evidence. I suspect that that scheme was introduced under the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 almost as a panic measure after the tragic death of young men in a fire in accommodation in Glasgow that had bars on the window. However, the scheme does not give local authorities further powers to prevent such an incident from happening again. That situation needs to be addressed. I ask the minister to consider lodging an appropriate amendment at stage 2.

One of my colleagues will concentrate on the functional standards versus technical standards aspect of the bill. I want to register my concern that, if technical standards are no longer to be mandatory, we could be in danger of reducing our standards to a lower common denominator. In light of the European directive, the Executive might feel that it has devised the best way to proceed, but how will the Parliament scrutinise and influence if the enabling legislation allows ministers a free hand with guidance and regulation? The accountability to ministers of the new, or reformed, central building standards body is noted in the policy memorandum but, again, that issue is not addressed in the bill.

A number of the provisions might have significant cost implications; evidence was taken about the potential costs to local authorities. The City of Edinburgh Council highlighted the potential for an "enormous burden" and the Scottish Association of Chief Building Control Officers warned that the aims could not be achieved without "adequate funding". Paragraph 148 of the financial memorandum would seem to suggest that fee income and savings gained will result in cost neutrality. I am not convinced, and I ask the Deputy Minister for Social Justice to expand on that when he sums up the debate.

A particularly contentious issue is that of independent verifiers. It is understandable that strong views were expressed for and against by the private and public sectors. I was a bit puzzled by the evidence that was given by the former Deputy Minister for Social Justice, Hugh Henry. He contended that the Executive had no plans to extend the verification role to the private sector but that the possibility of doing so should not be excluded. I thank the minister for expanding on that point today, but did the former Deputy Minister for Social Justice's evidence indicate that the Executive does not yet know what the additional costs to local authorities are likely to be and that, rather than fund local authorities to do the work, the work will be privatised?

I was particularly impressed by the Disability Rights Commission's evidence on behalf of the country's 800,000 disabled people. The commission also raised the question of replacing mandatory standards with guidance as a cause for concern. Requests for relaxations have long been contentious for disabled people.

The duties in part III of the Disability Discrimination Act 1995 come into force in October 2004. Bearing that in mind, no building currently in use by the public should be granted relaxations for any aspect of any regulation that would have a direct or indirect negative impact the accessibility or usability of the building by disabled people. I say to the minister that I assume that no relaxations whatever will be allowed in the case of new buildings.

The explicit inclusion of access and usability in the functional standards would ensure clarity in determinations after a breach is reported. It is also vital that accredited verifiers include professionals who are competent and qualified to certify that a design is accessible and usable by disabled people.

The Disability Rights Commission asked that the definition on convenience be expanded to include explicit reference to accessibility and usability for the disabled, rather than the implicit references in the policy memorandum and the explanatory notes. The word convenience does not adequately cover, or might not be understood to cover, the requirements of disabled people. A building that is not accessible or usable is considerably more than an inconvenience; it is discriminatory, exclusive and may hinder someone from accessing services and facilities. I am sure that a solution to that issue is not beyond the scope of the many resources that the Executive has to hand. I ask the minister to consider the matter further.

I also ask for an assurance that the bill is only one part of the continuing modernisation of building construction and repair. Are issues such as tenement law and rethinking construction practices to incorporate the Eagan principles still on the agenda? Who is driving the agenda?

I could say much more. Fine intentions have been laid before the chamber today and stage 2 will be interesting. I reiterate that the Scottish National Party supports the general principles of the bill.

09:44

John Scott (Ayr) (Con): I declare an interest: at one time, I was a student member of the Institution of Civil Engineers, but that does not appear in my entry in the register of members' interests. I welcome Des McNulty to the front bench. This is the first time that he has appeared in his ministerial role in a debate in which I have been involved.

The Building (Scotland) Bill, which was introduced on 18 September 2002, is welcome legislation. It updates the 1959 act and, in addition to making our legislation EU compliant, should simplify and modernise existing legislation. However, some issues need to be addressed in the debate, including verification, certification, costs to local authorities, functional design, building warrants and late applications.

The Conservatives welcome the Executive's proposal that verification should continue to be carried out by local authorities. We also welcome the opportunity for private sector verification to be introduced at a later date if required. I am content for us to wait to see how private sector verification works in England and Wales.

We heard conflicting evidence about whether private sector verification could deliver impartial, accountable and accessible enforcement powers. In my view, the jury is still out on the matter in England and Wales. However, if the private sector model works in the long term, there is no reason why we should not welcome it in Scotland.

I quote the ultra-cautious Institution of Civil Engineers:

"The approved inspector system in England has offered the opportunity to provide tailored services on a commercial basis. Competition has delivered service improvements in both the public and the private sector in line with best-value policies."

If that view is still held in another three or five years, I can see no reason why our Government in Scotland should not introduce similar private sector verification. Indeed, to an extent, that is happening already in small local authorities that buy in verification services from larger and better equipped neighbouring authorities.

Certification is a vital part of the process. There is a need for certifiers to take a narrow role but to be aware of the overall design concept. Contracts above a certain size, which would be defined by ministers, should not be subject only to self-certification. Although I accept totally that a verifier must take the overview, it would also be important to encourage certifiers to be aware and to think holistically about the design concept. As buildings become more sophisticated and complex, there is a greater risk that fragmentation of design could lead to structural failure. Quite simply, the greater the number of people involved in considering the potential risks of a design concept, the more likely we are to avoid structural failures such as the Ronan Point disaster and accidents such as the Summerland fire.

In practice, a dialogue might take place between verifiers and certifiers, but the minister might wish to consider asking certifiers to consider during the certification process whether, in their view, the part of the design that they are certifying creates any risk to the design concept as a whole.

I welcome the minister's conclusions that fees must be set to recover costs. It is worth noting that those costs could be significant for the property sector if local authorities are to be obliged to inspect existing buildings regularly to ensure that they are not dangerous.

The Executive must be aware that the financial cost to local authorities, as well as lack of funding, could delay the introduction of the new building standards system. It must ensure that adequate funding is provided. It would be unacceptable if delays in the verification process caused contractors and clients time and money as a result of deficiencies in and underfunding of local authority departments.

It is essential that functional standards be maintained and improved upon. Although I accept the Executive's intention to reduce prescription in functional design, I share the concern of the Disability Rights Commission that

"technical standards may no longer be mandatory."—[Official Report, Transport and the Environment Committee, 6 November 2002; c 3615.]

Linda Fabiani also highlighted that concern.

There is an absolute need for ministers to reassure us that existing standards of accessibility will be built on rather than reduced. After the bill has been passed, I believe that the Scottish ministers will need to keep that matter under review.

I also want to refer in passing to the likelihood that the costs of indemnity insurance will escalate. We must be reassured that appropriate insurance will be available under the new regime. The minister must spell out how such arrangements would work before we proceed. Finally, the definition of "owner of a building" must be clarified, and I look forward to the Executive lodging suitable stage 2 amendments in that respect. The Conservative party welcomes the bill and looks forward to lodging our own stage 2 amendments.

09:50

Nora Radcliffe (Gordon) (LD): In a previous existence, I had contact with a group of professionals, the leader of which used to shrug off any unnecessary detail with the phrase "That's too technical". As a result, every time I say, "That's too technical", I have a wry smile on my face. That explains why I am smiling when I say that the Building (Scotland) Bill is quite technical.

The bill deals with the framework that ensures that buildings are safe and fit for purpose. Moreover, it moves away from the highly prescriptive nature of the current building control system by recognising that there can be more than one solution to a problem—an approach that has been widely welcomed. I tried years ago to secure official acceptance for construction of an innovative reed-bed system to deal with domestic sewage in a private dwelling. The bill's proposed system's flexibility and ability to deal with matters that are outside the box is therefore very welcome and will lead to good things. Furthermore, from the evidence that the Transport and the Environment Committee took, the industry seems to feel that the bill will accomplish its aim of facilitating innovation.

At this point, I should express my appreciation to the experts who submitted evidence to the committee and helped us to get our lay minds around concepts such as functional standards, technical standards and so on.

The bill will create two new kinds of officer—certifiers and verifiers—whose complementary roles will help safely to deliver the desired flexibility and innovation. However, there is a question about whether verification should be available from private sector providers. Although that happens south of the border, the benefits of such a system have not been universally agreed and, as private verification will not be immediately introduced in Scotland, there is still time to evaluate more fully the experience in England and Wales.

The committee also discussed the financial implications of such a system for local authorities, and it was suggested that the introduction of private verification might affect the recovery of costs through fees. Furthermore, concerns were expressed about erosion of the public sector skills base if much of the work is moved to the private sector. Although such questions will require consideration in future, they should be borne in mind now.

Although I welcome the measures that will strengthen local authorities' ability to identify dangerous buildings, I feel that they will not be effective if authorities cannot afford to implement them.

For many years, it has seemed that building standards are the obvious way of attaining proper energy efficiency and accessibility to buildings. However, the bill will establish only the mechanisms; the regulations that follow will actually deliver those objectives. As a result, the regulations will be more exciting than the bill itself. However, the bill is the necessary prerequisite and it is important that we get it right.

The witnesses who gave evidence to the committee clearly appreciated the lengthy pre-legislative consultation that fed into the bill and they felt strongly that such an approach has paid dividends and that the bill now meets its objectives. When we deal with such technical measures, it is important that we listen to professionals and make the best use of their expertise. I am happy to say that that has happened with this bill. Perhaps in our stage 2 consideration we will now be able to clear up some of the problems that have been highlighted during stage 1.

The Liberal Democrats are very happy to support the bill's principles and look forward to stage 2.

09:54

Bristow Muldoon (Livingston) (Lab): Before I address the bill, I want to welcome the new Deputy Minister for Social Justice, Des McNulty, and to wish him well in his new role. Des comes to his position with some advantages and disadvantages. As a member of the Transport and the Environment Committee, he was part of the bill's stage 1 consideration. However, that might well prove to be a disadvantage, because he might now have to accept many of his own recommendations. [Interruption.] I see that Margaret Curran has overruled that.

We must recognise that, although the bill is very technical, its provisions will be important to people in Scotland because they will affect so many aspects of their lives. The bill has real practical benefits; for example, it proposes to give to ministers powers to make regulations for a range of different purposes, including health, safety, welfare and convenience. As Linda Fabiani pointed out, the issue of convenience is important because it can improve the accessibility of buildings for many people. My colleague Ken Macintosh will discuss such issues later.

The bill also gives powers to ministers to make regulations about the conservation of power and the promotion of sustainable development. I hope that Mr McNulty will, when he sums up, expand on the way in which such powers might be used. For example, on health and safety, I ask him to say how the powers could be used to promote safer designs. When he was a member of the Transport and the Environment Committee, he asked whether the legislation could be used to reduce the incidence of injuries suffered by children who crush their fingers in doors.

As for the conservation of power and sustainable development, the Social Justice Committee invited the Executive to explain how it intends to use the powers in the bill as a tool to meet its overall policy aims of reducing fuel poverty and promoting sustainable development. Again, I ask the minister to provide further explanation of how such powers will be used.

I will now, having identified some of the bill's positive aspects, raise some areas of concern that the Executive should take on board. I will not be able to mention all the concerns this morning, so I ask the Executive to consider in detail the Transport and the Environment Committee's report. I want to focus on verifiers and certifiers, which other members have mentioned. Public sector organisations in particular have expressed concerns about the introduction of private verifiers, although I note that at the moment the Executive has no intention to use that power. In its written evidence, the City of Edinburgh Council stated:

"No private verifier could ever meet the criteria of being independent and accountable to the local electorate when they are appointed and paid for by a client directly. The DETR in England has as a result created a private building control system ... the essential elements of which are no refusals, no problem and no enforcement!"

I acknowledge the minister's commitment that, before any such system is introduced, there will be full consultation with local government and a full analysis made of the impact of any such changes. Although I welcome that response to one of the committee's recommendations, I ask ministers to consider whether there is any need at all to include the power in the bill.

I will touch briefly on certifiers, because I realise that I am at the end of my time.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We can be a bit more relaxed—I do not mind if you go a bit beyond five minutes.

Bristow Muldoon: So we have loads of time this morning.

Concerns were raised about certifiers; in particular, the Institute of Civil Engineers in Scotland was concerned about having an overall holistic approach to verification of safe design. I know that the Deputy Minister for Social Justice was himself concerned about the issue when he was a member of the Transport and the Environment Committee, and I hope that the Executive will examine the matter closely before the bill is passed. The committee recommended that the Executive should consider giving a single individual responsibility for managing the certification process, and I ask it to take that suggestion on board.

In conclusion, the bill is an important measure that introduces new powers that can be used to promote better and safer buildings in Scotland. I ask the Executive to consider carefully the role of verifiers and certifiers. It recognises that local government has performed the role well in the past, so I ask that we do not throw the baby out with the bath water when reviewing the building control system. I welcome the powers on dangerous buildings and recommend that the Parliament support the bill at stage 1.

10:00

Fiona McLeod (West of Scotland) (SNP): Nora Radcliffe began by saying that the bill is technical and by implying that it is boring. The bill is not exciting, but it is important, and it will be instructive to watch how a former committee member who knows the Transport and the Environment Committee's concerns translates them into amendments to the bill.

A stage 1 debate is about a committee's being able to highlight its areas of concern and, on reading the Transport and the Environment Committee's report, we see five areas of concern. One of those concerns stems from the Social Justice Committee's report, which I commend to the ministers, on fuel poverty and sustainable development. Members of that committee were also concerned about costs to local authorities, the role of private verifiers and, more important, the introduction of monitoring and auditing of those private verifiers. We also had concerns about the definition of an owner.

In my few minutes, I want to concentrate on the potential problem of the mandatory status of our new standards. The problem relates to the functional standards that we are about to introduce versus the technical standards that we have at the moment. Why is there a problem? For example, new functional standards for fire safety might say that building materials "shall not spread fire", which is a wonderful intention. However, the old technical standard would have set, for example, minimum times for fire doors to hold back fire and a minimum width for corridors, fire exits and stairways. That is the difference. The functional standard says, "shall not spread fire" but the technical standard ensures that fire cannot be spread. Similarly, the new functional standard will say that access to buildings should be convenient, but the previous technical standard would have set, for example, a maximum gradient for ramps. It is clear that there are issues that we must consider.

I am particularly concerned by the transfer from technical to functional standards. That transfer has happened in England and Wales and the Transport and the Environment Committee heard from people who experienced the transfer that they have reservations about it and how it is working in practice. In particular, the committee heard from the Disability Rights Commission and the Fire Protection Association about their concerns on the transfer and the mandatory level of the standards.

Before I go on to that, I return to the word "convenient", which the minister used and to which Linda Fabiani referred in her speech. The DRC said that using the term "convenient" to describe access to a building is outmoded. In evidence to the committee, the then minister Hugh Henry said that it was okay to continue to use that term in the new standards because it was used in the Building (Scotland) Act 1959 and was understood as a technical term. I refer ministers to the DRC's evidence that said that if we are updating the standards, we should update the language as well in order to ensure that the terms that we use show fully what they are meant to achieve.

I want confirmation that the technical standards that we have at the moment will not be reduced when they become functional standards and that the mandatory nature of the standards will be enforceable in law. One of the minister's civil servants said in committee:

"The expanded functional standards will still set a minimum that must be met and that the courts will be able to enforce. That minimum will be no lower than that which we set at present through regulation."—[Official Report, Transport and the Environment Committee, 13 November 2002; c 3690.]

I want, as do many others, to hear on record from the ministers that that will be the case, because it is important. As both the Disability Rights Commission and Fire Protection Association pointed out, it is much more difficult to remedy accessibility or fire-proofing defects once a building is built than it is to ensure that it is built appropriately by meeting standards as it is built.

Mention has been made of standards that buildings have to meet in other legislation. That includes part III of the Disability Discrimination Act 1995, which will come into force in October 2004 and, in relation to fire safety, the European directive on construction products. If the functional standards in the bill do not meet those minimum standards, the buildings will not meet other legislation.

I also want assurance that the Building Standards Advisory Committee will include representation from fire authorities and disability groups to ensure that such organisations' concerns are considered.

In conclusion, I am concerned that much of the legislation's substance will come through regulation and guidance rather than be included in the bill. That presents Parliament with a difficulty in scrutinising and influencing legislation. Again, will the minister assure us that Parliament will be involved in the production of the regulations and guidance? Hugh Henry said that there would be many issues for ministers to deal with, including the appointment of verifiers. Will the minister assure us that Parliament will be part of that process to ensure that when the bill is passed, it works for everybody?

10:07

John Farquhar Munro (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD): The Building (Scotland) Bill is a welcome bill that I am pleased to see has to date attracted cross-party support. More important, it has gained the general support of public agencies that are currently responsible for, and have the remit to approve and oversee, building standards for all buildings and structures in Scotland.

Members will no doubt be aware that responsibility for building warrants for new and renovated buildings rests with local authorities. Under their control, the system has been regulated consistently and has been applied professionally and fairly. The system has generally been accepted and, which is important, complied with by all sections of the building trade. I question some of the bill's proposals in that I do not consider it to be practical or appropriate to remove that function from local authorities, as some suggest should happen. It would be a foolish and retrograde step to appoint private sector inspectors or verifiers to manage the building control system and we should resist any such move with the utmost vigour.

The bill goes a long way towards addressing the problems of substandard housing in Scotland—we all know how much of that exists in the private and public sectors. Much has been achieved, but much more is required. Our citizens have a justifiable right and expectation to occupy warm, dry and affordable homes. I do not agree entirely with everything in the bill and would like to see an amendment lodged to include insistence that all commercial buildings to which the public have access will be required to secure and display an electrical compliance certificate. That certificate could be renewed annually in the same way as with the existing requirement to display a current insurance or fire certificate. Such a change would ensure that all electrical appliances and, more important, the main power supply were installed and maintained to an approved and safe standard. The sort of inspection and testing that is required is quick and easily undertaken and would not impose a new burden on the property owners or occupiers.

There is much merit in the bill and it deserves the unanimous support of the Scottish Parliament. Accordingly, I am pleased to indicate my support for the Building (Scotland) Bill, with minor amendments.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: It might help if I say to the remaining speakers that there is scope for them to have up to six minutes each.

10:10

Mr Kenny MacAskill (Lothians) (SNP): I want to deal with one matter that does not appear to be referred to in the bill but which I believe is touched on in the policy memorandum, which says that the bill should

"make the system more responsive to the needs of the general public and industry ... create more flexibility for designers to promote new and innovative design"

and

"support Scottish Executive aims of providing excellence in public services and encouraging sustainable development".

I believe that the matter that is missing in relation to those aims is broadband roll-out. If we do not address that in the Building (Scotland) Bill, we will miss an opportunity. If the Executive says that we will address the matter in future years, it will be merely postponing work that should be done now.

Members of the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Executive recognise the importance of rolling out broadband. However, it can be argued that, in the 21st century, broadband is as important a public utility as sanitation, electricity, lighting and so on were in previous centuries. I appreciate that the Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning has recently made pronouncements on and provided cash for supporting broadband roll-out, and I recognise that the Deputy Minister for Social Justice—whom I congratulate on his promotion—has a family interest in the matter, but it seems to me that we have an opportunity not only to address the minutiae that are clearly important, but to take a new step forward and consider how we can take the initiative in rolling out broadband rather than dealing with it from behind.

At present, there is public support for rolling out broadband and BT has embarked on a major advertising campaign, but all of us will be aware of difficulties that friends or constituents have had in getting broadband. Those difficulties happen not only in rural Scotland but in cities and major conurbations in central Scotland. Throughout the country, people either cannot obtain broadband or can obtain it only at an unaffordable price. The bill gives us an opportunity to say to building companies that, if they are building a housing or business estate, the provision of fibre optic cables—or an appropriate alternative—is as important a requirement as are provision of power cables, water and sanitation.

We must acknowledge, however, that that cannot be done in all areas. It might be unreasonable to compel someone who is building two new houses in Achiltibuie to provide fibre optic cabling. There must be made available an opt-out on the basis of cost. That flexibility could be provided for in regulations, which are dealt with early in the bill. However, there should be a standard for any construction project that involves, say, more than 25 houses or whatever we decide on. At present, the Executive is trying to aggregate resources for industrial estates that are already in commission. Why do not we ensure that any new industrial or housing estate is required to provide broadband access?

We should not require builders to pipe broadband directly into every house, but we should require that there be a fibre optic cable or an ADSL connection within a reasonable distance. The difficulty that we face is that anyone who wants to get broadband in their new house can be quoted ridiculous prices—for example £3,000—to get it. If all that a telecommunications company had to do was connect the house to the pipe at the end of the road, the cost would be much less. It would perhaps be as little as £250 or less, which would be an insignificant amount, given the sorts of prices that people pay for houses today.

We have a golden opportunity for the Executive and the Scottish Parliament to put Scotland at the forefront of the roll-out of broadband. It is important that we continue the efforts that are being made by Scottish Executive, Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise, but we have an opportunity to make the situation better at the outset. Of course, it is not within the sphere of responsibility of a building company to ensure that broadband is rolled out to the area in which it is building houses, but it can work in partnership with telecommunications companies to do so. The only caveat that should be added is that, if only one telecommunications company is involved in the provision of the fibre optic cables and so on, it must ensure that there is enough capacity to allow its competitors also to provide the service. That is not beyond the capabilities of modern technology and would allow, for example, people in an estate in which BT had provided broadband connections to choose instead to subscribe to Telewest Broadband.

I do not know whether the Executive is already considering what I propose, but if we do not do what I propose, we will miss a golden opportunity to put Scotland at the forefront of broadband provision. I see many heads nodding in agreement and I assume that everyone is aware of the importance of the issue. I have discussed matters with the telecommunications companies and I know that they are prepared to support the Executive in relation to the proposal. If the Executive has not considered the matter, I urge it to do so. I know that the minister is interested in the matter.

I repeat that we have an opportunity to ensure that a utility that is essential in the 21st century is given the same priority that was given in previous centuries to other important public utilities. We forsake this golden opportunity at our peril.

10:16

Mr Kenneth Macintosh (Eastwood) (Lab): I am sure that members will not mind if I keep my contribution short. Perhaps I should speak extremely slowly.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: There is no compulsion to occupy all the time that you have been allowed.

Mr Macintosh: I welcome the Building (Scotland) Bill. It is not a headline grabber, but it is nonetheless necessary. It will improve the regulation of building in Scotland and make the system more responsive to owners and the public. I hope in particular that the system in practice will be simpler, fairer and more transparent. There is no doubt that the approved certifiers of construction and the public building standards register are steps in the right direction towards access to information and the availability of a list of suitable and approved installers and tradespeople. That will clarify the system for all of us and give us more confidence in the decisions that are made.

However, I am concerned that some issues will not be fully addressed. I know of one case involving a constituent who was worried that the original work that had been done on his building was not done to a high enough standard. In particular, his roof tiles were not nailed down, despite that being in the manufacturer's specification. Not only is there a danger of the tiles' being blown off in high winds despite their weight, but they leak and have damaged my constituent's flat as a result. As usual, the matter is not clear-cut. Although my constituent has had a surveyor confirm his opinion, the local authority and the property factor have made a different judgment. One of the difficulties could lie in asking the local authority to question its own judgment in approving a building warrant and completion certificate, despite the safety risk that might exist. The other difficulty lies in the grey area between what is a matter of quality and consumer protection and what should be treated as a building standards and safety issue. I am not sure that I have any solutions to that problem, but I urge the Executive to keep an eye on any on-going difficulties that might arise.

Concerns about disabled access and usability will be familiar to everyone in the chamber and I welcome the work that the Executive has done in consulting disabled people and addressing their worries. However, there is no doubt that there is anxiety, which Linda Fabiani highlighted, that moving away from prescribed technical standards might remove the protections that disabled people have fought for long and hard. I welcome the opportunity for builders, architects and designers to come up with more innovative solutions to problems of access and usability, but I want the minister to give us further assurance that the bill will not mark a step backward rather than a step forward.

There is a problem with currently prescriptive technical standards, which is that they are inadequate and do not reflect actual need. For example, I believe that the technical standard for doors in respect of wheelchair access to disabled toilets is 800mm, but that is barely enough to get a wheelchair through a door. Some of my constituents have called 800mm "a knuckle scraper"—that is not a reference to any neanderthal constituents I have. The existing standards do not, for example, allow for the practicalities of motorised wheelchairs, which require a slightly larger turning circle. Many examples have been reported to me of toilets where wheelchair users can hardly get in and, when they do, have great difficulty in turning round or even closing the door behind them. The most embarrassing such toilet is located in the building at the Southern general hospital from which wheelchairs are prescribed in south Glasgow. The toilets, rather than the users, are disabled in such cases.

If the bill allows and encourages builders and designers properly to take the views of disabled people into account, it will mark an improvement. If we can move to an approach in which facilities for disabled people are made to work, rather than being considered a problem to be worked around, the bill will be very welcome. I look forward to hearing more reassurance from the ministers on that point, but I welcome the bill.

10:21

Colin Campbell (West of Scotland) (SNP): I am glad that Ken Macintosh got into specifics anecdotally, because I am going to rely on that.

I purchased a building in 1970 and spent a large amount of my spare time renewing and repairing parts of it. Because I was a teacher, much of that was do-it-yourself work. My experience has encompassed amateur efforts in every trade except plumbing and electricity, both of which I regard as potentially far more hazardous than the dangers that are inherent in falling off the roof.

I assisted a friend in the conversion of an old beaming shed in Kilbarchan into a home. At the time, I could speak authoritatively about dwangs and noggings—and knew what they were. I still know, and if the minister can tell me what they are in his closing speech, I will be impressed. I have also worked on flats that belong to my sons, because two of them are teachers too and cannot afford tradesmen.

I have no problem with the principle that Scottish building standards must comply with the European Community's construction products Council directive 90/106/EEC. I assume—because I have not read that document at all, let alone in detail—that the directive introduces sensible and safe standards that will be universal in Europe and that the standards are uniform only on those basics. I assume that there is ample scope for Scotland to have different and higher standards. I would not want tiles to be laid on laths as a norm in Scotland when they are currently laid on sarking. I presume that diversity to reflect climatic peculiarities will be permitted.

I welcome the commitment to sustainable development. Anyone who passes houses or shops that are in the course of alteration invariably finds skips filled with walls that are not necessarily old but have recently been torn out and are being replaced because somebody wants the building altered or wants a different style. Kenny MacAskill's suggestion of installing broadband in advance would be a way of preventing the tearing up of roads and landscape at some future date. Advance design, advance planning and better town planning are all part of that. Equally, I welcome the bill's commitment to further the conservation of fuel and power.

Cowboy builders exist. I can think of an example where developers refurbished and developed an historic building, sold it off as flats and refused to take any responsibility for subsequent failures in the building that were caused by defective workmanship. In that context, the suggested register of approved certifiers of design is to be welcomed. Obviously, in new build, that is particularly important, because such people can design buildings that are flexible for future use and alteration, without the need for extensive use of building materials in making the alterations.

I welcome the idea of certifiers of construction. They will have a vital role in supervising the kind of jobs for which we all call in tradespeople. Recently, I considered installing a gas stove at home. One firm that I phoned said, "No we don't install them, but we know a gas fitter." I gave that firm a distinct body swerve and moved to the firm that said "Yes, we are registered by all the following organisations and can guarantee"—as far as such things can be guaranteed—"that we will do a good job."

The rapid and well-monitored identification of a well-qualified body of certifiers of construction is essential to provide citizens with the necessary safeguards against cowboy builders and cowboy installers. Apart from the big builders, who are obviously more aware and more conscious of the demands of regulations, the certifiers of construction will have an important role to play among ordinary people who often get caught out by the cowboys.

The Scottish National Party supports the bill.

10:25

Rhona Brankin (Midlothian) (Lab): Like other members, I welcome the bill, which seeks to modernise the Scottish building control system, which is currently based on an act that dates way back to 1959—the Building (Scotland) Act 1959. In the relatively brief time that I have, I will cover some of the issues that architects have raised through the Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland. First, I declare that I am an honorary fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects.

Overall, architects have welcomed the proposals in the bill, because there are clear inadequacies in the existing building control system. There are inconsistencies in interpretation between local authorities and inconsistencies in performance. Sometimes, clients are naturally reluctant to challenge the building control departments in cases of dispute over interpretation, because that would require referral to the sheriff, which is time consuming and costly.

On the other hand, architects believe that the existing system is well managed in many parts of the country. The system requires a warrant approval prior to commencement of works. That is important: it is vital to prevent rash and potentially abortive actions. The new arrangements in the bill will address the main problems and provide enabling powers that will make the new system more efficient and more effective.

Architects support the distinction in the bill between functional standards and performance requirements, because they believe that that will allow for innovation, which is increasingly important in a fast-changing world and will recognise the undoubted talent of Scotland's creative architects. The distinction should also assist in addressing sustainable development objectives and allow maximum architectural value with minimum environmental harm.

I draw the minister's attention to two areas on which I ask for reassurance. Under the new system, the owner will issue a certificate of completion. Although that should bring clarity to the system, some arrangements will require to be put in place to ensure that it does not slow down the process. Absentee or overseas owners might be difficult to contact, and tenants and leaseholders who wish to make internal alterations should not be inhibited from doing so.

I welcome the proposed arrangements for strengthening local authority powers to inspect buildings regularly and prevent danger and accidents. Those powers are particularly important in multi-owned older stock—the minister made reference to Christine Foster's tragic death at Ryan's Bar. However, for those powers to be most effective, property owners and lessees should have their buildings regularly surveyed and assessed by approved certifiers who have a duty to register defects with the local authority. The Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland assisted in the publication of "The Tenement Handbook" more than a decade ago because it wanted to ensure that proper maintenance of older stock took place. Such maintenance is a continuing concern.

Overall, the bill's provisions are to be welcomed. The bill shows that our agenda is to encourage enterprise and innovation, to empower and protect consumers and to create sustainable developments. The bill will provide a modernised building standards system in Scotland and will create a more flexible system for business and encourage innovation in building. It will provide more information for the general public on buildings, which will assist in improving the house-buying process and encourage greater consistency of standards throughout Scotland.

I urge members to support the bill.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Rhona Brankin did not quite manage to fill the 13 minutes that were available. I make that point for the sake of the next debate, in order to advise whoever keeps an eye on these things that we are running slightly ahead of schedule.

We come now to closing speeches. Robert Brown, for the Liberal Democrats, officially has four minutes, but I will allow latitude for up to six minutes for closing speakers.

10:30

Robert Brown (Glasgow) (LD): I apologise for arriving at the chamber late. The train that I was taking this morning was cancelled, and I have not had the advantage of hearing the Minister for Social Justice or Linda Fabiani.

That said, this has been a good and interesting debate, particularly for members who, like me, fall into the non-technical category, to which Nora Radcliffe alluded. I listened with considerable awe to the experiences of hands-on, technical, practical people such as Colin Campbell. I do not fall into that category in any shape or form.

In common with the other parties, the Liberal Democrats generally welcome the bill. Members will forgive me if I am slightly more remote from the bill than some speakers have been. The Social Justice Committee, of which I am a member, has had some involvement on the fringes of the bill, but we have not, of course, taken the same amount of evidence as the Transport and the Environment Committee has.

Section 21 provides for building standards registers. I am not a conveyancing solicitor, but I recall, from deep in the bowels of my memory, things called letters of comfort. Letters of comfort arise when people are buying and selling houses and there is some deficiency from a while back relating to the question whether completion certificates exist. I wonder whether letters of comfort are still part of the system and, if they are, whether there might be any merit in allowing them to be included among the things that are registered. As I said, letters of comfort relate to situations involving some deficiency but in which it is not necessary to go back to square 1; rather, they are issued when there is satisfaction on the part of the local authority that standards have been kept to.

The Transport and the Environment Committee's report raises the important subject of indemnity insurance. I am reminded of an old case in which comparison was made between the standards of care that apply to a solicitor and those that apply to a building engineer. The main point was that solicitors are not expected to guarantee the result of the case—although they do their best to achieve success—whereas a different standard applies to engineers and to builders of bridges and houses, because people do not expect the bridges or houses to fall down. There is an important element of guarantee in that, and indemnity insurance operates against that background.

I endorse what Kenny MacAskill said about broadband. People who live in the Cambuslang area of my constituency have made representations on broadband because it is currently not provided there. It is important to make that facility available at the start of developments.

The Social Justice Committee touched on fuel poverty in connection with energy efficiency. In thinking about the provision of renewable energy, particularly from solar power, I wondered whether there might be the facility under the regulations that will be introduced through the bill, and under codes of guidance, to deal with the issue in more depth. It seems that we are roughly at the point that Germany, Japan and other countries have now gone through. Solar energy and wind energy—I am referring not to big windmills, but to little windmills, for example in cities such as Rotterdam—have reached the stage at which there is the potential to include in new developments a more dynamic public-policy driver to make available those contributions to the available energy basket, as it were. The bill offers a good opportunity to include such provision with the building of new properties.

In that context, I note that section 1(2) deals with consultation on codes of guidance and with regulations, and I wonder whether it would be appropriate to think specifically about Energy Action Scotland with regard to such consultation and to codes of guidance or regulations. Such groups, as well as builders and architects, have relevant expertise.

In conclusion—I have been speaking for just over four minutes, and am now using a little bit of the leeway that the Presiding Officer allowed—I revert to the idea that I have mooted once or twice before about a homeowner's log, or MOT register, as it were, of the things that have taken place in a house. The proposals for building standards might present an opportunity to encourage house owners to keep official records of the things that happen to their houses. That might cover, for example, building warrants, completion certificates and electrical certificates. It is important that the history of a house is known. If that idea were implemented properly and if the long-term maintenance matters were covered, it could enhance houses' values. I hope that that idea might be considered.

I hope that I have made some helpful suggestions and comments on what is generally a very good bill, which is supported throughout the chamber. I finish by adding my thanks to those that have already been expressed to ministers for having introduced the bill. I look forward to its passing into legislation.

10:35

Murdo Fraser (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con): It is my pleasure to wind up the debate for the Conservatives. As my colleague John Scott said at the beginning of the debate, we support the general principles of the bill.

I have three points to make in relation both to the bill and to wider aspects of building control. A number of members referred to my first point, which is verification, particularly the opportunity to have private sector verifiers, which the Conservatives welcome. I can speak from personal experience on this. In a previous life, as a commercial lawyer practising in Edinburgh, much of my day-to-day work was taken up with building projects. Many developers experienced frustration at delays in the various stages of building contracts because of the time that it took to get the appropriate official from the relevant building control department out to visit the development in question.

If we are to provide other avenues for that exercise, which do not depend on a local government monopoly in verification, that will be very much welcomed by the construction industry, especially in a fast-moving commercial environment such as that of property development in Edinburgh, where buildings are going up all over the place, and where it can sometimes be difficult for the building control department to keep up. If building control departments had the opportunity to contract out some of the services that they provide, that would be very useful. I note that the proposals on verifiers were welcomed by the Institution of Civil Engineers in Scotland, as well as by other bodies, including the Scottish Consumer Council, a representative of which said:

"It does not matter whether the verifiers are from the private or the public sector as long as they are transparent and accountable."—[Official Report, Transport and the Environment Committee, 6 November 2002; c 3620.]

Of course there must be adequate safeguards for the protection of the public, but I think that that issue can be overcome, and I welcome the consultation that the Executive will undertake on that point.

My second point was mentioned by Robert Brown: letters of comfort. Conveyancing solicitor colleagues of mine came up against the issue time and again. A letter of comfort is produced by a local authority building inspector to say that works that have been carried out, although they have not been properly certified, nevertheless meet the appropriate regulations. We would like to think that we live in an ideal world in which, when people get work done to their house, they always get a building warrant first or a completion certificate, but many people do not bother. They might not even realise that, if they are taking down a wall here and there or installing an en suite bathroom , they need to get those certificates.

It might only be when the house is surveyed and an offer to purchase is received that the poor solicitor—[Interruption.]—I realise that "poor solicitor" is something of a paradox—who is acting for the seller realises that there is a problem, and that the work has been done without authorisation. Although there is a mechanism to apply retrospectively for a building warrant and completion certificate, there is usually no time practically to make that application, because the date of entry tends to be set at between four and eight weeks from purchase.

In that situation, people approach their local authority and ask for what is called a letter of comfort. The local authority will send out an inspector to examine the work and, if the work is all right, issue a letter to say that, although no certification is available, the works will pass regulations. Letters of comfort are therefore extremely useful, but the problem is that there is a patchwork approach to them throughout Scotland, with no uniformity. It would have been useful if the bill had introduced a uniform approach for letters of comfort, so that local authorities throughout Scotland would adopt a similar approach. Perhaps the Executive could address that matter, under either the Building (Scotland) Bill or a future bill.

My third point relates to historic buildings; I have raised this issue in the chamber before. Balthayock House is an historic listed building just outside Perth, which has fallen into disrepair. Scotland is littered with historic buildings—most of which date from the late 19th century—that are now of little practical use. They are far too large to be used as family homes and it would cost too much to modernise them. Although they could be used as hotels or institutions, that market is limited. There are far too many such buildings.

Earlier this year there was a desperate tragedy at Baldovie House, just outside Dundee—a young lad who had broken into the house was killed. Large, derelict, empty houses are magnets for young children. Regardless of whether the owners erect fences or signs that state "Dangerous building—do not enter", kids will enter such houses to play inside them.

We need to strike a balance on this issue. Of course we must protect our historic buildings and built heritage. However, it is time to take a more reasoned approach to the future of listed buildings that are of limited historical or architectural merit, are falling into disrepair and have no practical use in the modern world. The cost of repairing such a building might far exceed the economic value of the house if repaired. The estimated cost of repairing Balthayock House is £2.3 million. It has also been estimated that, once the house had been fully restored, its market value would be about £750,000. Given those figures, only an ignoramus would spend money to repair the house and restore it to modern standards.

We must examine the way in which Historic Scotland approaches the question of listing and of giving consent to the demolition of listed buildings. I understand that the Education, Culture and Sport Committee proposes to conduct an inquiry into Historic Scotland and the way in which it operates. I hope that the committee will cover the issue that I have raised.

I conclude by welcoming the bill—as other members have done—and reaffirming that the Scottish Conservatives are pleased to support its general principles.

10:42

Mr Kenneth Gibson (Glasgow) (SNP): The SNP warmly welcomes the bill. This unsung piece of legislation shows the Parliament working at its best, both in committee and in the chamber, on a constructive and cross-party basis. I doubt that the outside world will ever hear about that, but we should commend the work that the Transport and the Environment Committee and the ministerial team have done on the bill.

The SNP believes that any new system must have a robust basis and credible enforcement powers, and reflect the need for basic accountability and competence—from both the design professional and those who are charged with verifying compliance. The new system must be reactive to the needs of developers and proactive in addressing innovation and sustainability. It must build on the experiences of practising building standards professionals.

We believe that the bill will both promote the aim of establishing a safe, efficient and sustainable built environment and protect local government's ability to ensure the delivery of such an environment. However, change or clarification will be required in some parts of the bill.

The SNP's own Bob the Builder, Colin Campbell, talked about cowboy builders. The bill presents us with an opportunity to eliminate the problem of cowboy builders and to increase consumer protection through a national approach to the regulation of building standards and the accreditation of builders. If the minister does not know what dwangs and noggings are, he should not feel bad about that—I do not know what they are either.

As Linda Fabiani said, the bill must be strengthened to ensure that it is objective driven, rather than process driven. We can do that by amending the preamble to reflect the bill's objectives more clearly. Section 7 must also be strengthened to require Scottish ministers not only to make lists available, but to ensure that they are accessible, widely publicised and effectively promoted. Ministers should be required to issue guidance on how those functions are carried out and to consult widely on the content of that guidance.

As Linda Fabiani and Ken Macintosh indicated, because of the changes that it makes to the hierarchy and the new roles and responsibilities that it introduces to advance building standards in Scotland, the bill has implications for access for disabled people to the built environment. Most concern has arisen from the resetting of the mandatory status of technical standards to guidance level. It would be helpful if access for and usability by disabled people were covered explicitly in the functional standards. The standards should be clear enough for the courts to determine whether the design and construction of a building perform that function.

Technical standards for disabled people, which will form the basis for the early versions of the forthcoming guidance, have often been criticised for setting minimal requirements. Ken Macintosh dealt with that issue in detail. Building control has failed to deliver those standards, such as they were, consistently and satisfactorily. Murdo Fraser expressed concerns about that. We are disappointed that the response to the criticisms that have been levelled at the building control system has been to issue guidance documents to replace mandatory technical standards. We need guidance that is clear, articulate, accessible and written in plain English. That will benefit all involved, including designers, building owners, builders and verifiers. It will also help to engage disabled building owners and users in the process.

The language of the bill mirrors that of the Building (Scotland) Act 1959. Both the policy memorandum and the explanatory notes imply that it covers the issues of access and usability.

My colleague Linda Fabiani raised the issue of relaxations. Class relaxations and relaxations that are granted on application have long been contentious issues for disabled people. The Disability Rights Commission recommended strongly that no building in public use should be granted relaxation of a regulation if that would have a direct or indirect negative impact on accessibility and usability. The commission also recommended that consideration of all applications for relaxation should take full account of potential and prospective users of buildings, as well as current users. Potential users of a building could include disabled people who wish to buy it or to use the services that it contains, or who are required to work in it.

Ministers could take account of the fact that buildings that are built for a specific purpose may in future be subject to a change of use. In such cases, the relaxation that allowed for the original use may no longer apply. Achieving accessibility and usability in a building that is complete and occupied is more expensive and time consuming than doing so at the design stage.

The Transport and the Environment Committee noted that a number of the bill's provisions could have significant cost implications for local authorities. Written evidence from the City of Edinburgh Council highlighted the "enormous burden" that regular use of the expanded powers to inspect buildings to ascertain whether they are dangerous could place on local authorities. More general concerns relating to local authority resources were expressed in written evidence from the Scottish Association of Chief Building Control Officers, which stated:

"The Association is concerned that in the short term at least a reduction in resource potentially available to local authorities will seriously affect the roll out and implementation of the building standards system. Much is made in the explanatory notes and policy memorandum of the need for local authorities to be more professional and reactive to those seeking building standards approval. The Association agrees wholeheartedly with this but would warn that such aims cannot be achieved without adequate funding."

The policy memorandum states that the current system for setting standards for buildings is very prescriptive. At present, complying with building regulations involves complying with technical standards that have full statutory force. According to the Executive, that creates a barrier to the use of innovative approaches to design and makes it more difficult to comply with harmonised European construction product standards, the first of which have already been produced. Many more such standards will be rolled out over the next few years.

The Disability Rights Commission raised concerns about the revised status of the technical standards. It stated:

"Our main bone of contention is the fact that the technical standards may no longer be mandatory. We feel that the impact of that could be negative, unless, through other facets of the bill, we can strengthen the application and observance of equalities and so strengthen accessibility and usability."—[Official Report, Transport and the Environment Committee, 6 November 2002; c 3615.]

The aspect of the bill that has attracted most comment, and some criticism—although not from the Conservatives—is the provision to allow the appointment of private sector verifiers, who would operate alongside the current system of local authority verifiers. This morning, the minister pointed out that the Executive has said that it has no plans to introduce such verifiers at present. In evidence to the Transport and the Environment Committee, the City of Edinburgh Council stated:

"No private verifier could ever meet the criteria of being independent and accountable to the local electorate when they are appointed and paid for by a client directly. The DETR in England has as a result created a private building control system which exists at present, therefore, the essential elements of which are no refusals, no problems and no enforcement!"

Nora Radcliffe was right to say that, before moving forward on this issue, we should wait to see how the English legislation beds down. The SNP has an open mind on the subject. Providing that the system is well monitored and regulated, it may be a possibility for the future.

I wanted to mention other issues, but because I am running out of time I will finish there.

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Mr George Reid): I call Des McNulty to wind up the debate. You have eight minutes on paper, minister, but you can have 10 minutes if you wish.

10:50

The Deputy Minister for Social Justice (Des McNulty): It is a paradox that in my maiden speech as a minister I end up talking about buildings, because not only am I Rhona Brankin's predecessor as convener of the cross-party architecture and the built environment group of the Scottish Parliament, but I spent much of my childhood on building sites. My father was a bricklayer and was obsessively interested in different kinds of buildings. My early years were spent looking at buildings and my teenage years were spent often holding the bottom of ladders or mixing mortar, so I have a particular interest in building issues. I can reveal, in response to Colin Campbell's point—this might be a point of interest to members, given that we were all invited to adopt a Scottish word a couple of weeks ago—that a dwang is the same as a nogging. Dwang is the Scots word and nogging is the English word for the cross-pieces in a stud partition wall. If members want the information, that is the background—sad, is it not?

Having sat on the Transport and the Environment Committee and taken evidence from my predecessor Hugh Henry, I hope that my erstwhile colleagues on the committee do not see me too much as poacher turned gamekeeper. One of the great things about our Parliament is that we can engage constructively in developing legislation that is in the best interests of the people of Scotland. The bill is an example of a technical piece of work that the Parliament can carry out in a non-party-political way. We are engaging with a wide variety of interests and the extensive consultation in the parliamentary process in the lead up to stage 1 has thrown up a number of new ideas.

I have my first intervention as a minister.

Sarah Boyack (Edinburgh Central) (Lab): I welcome the minister to his new post. I am conscious that the Presiding Officer has already invited the minister to take an extra two minutes, so I offer an intervention to assist in the process. The minister just talked about the technical nature of the bill, which several members in the chamber also mentioned. Although the bill is essential and desperately needed, I ask the minister to focus, in stage 2 and thereafter, on the core issue of informing members of the public how the bill will affect them as owners, tenants and residents. That key issue forms the backdrop to many of the comments that members have made.

Will the minister, either today or at stage 2, talk about the relationship between the bill, the forthcoming bill on the law of the tenement and other legislation that looks technical and boring but is critical to constituents such as mine? Margaret Curran mentioned in her opening remarks a tragic incident in my constituency. We have such problems, particularly in city-centre areas where there are issues with multiple ownership and we cannot find out who the owners are.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: That was helpful.

Sarah Boyack: I ask the minister to think about strengthening the local authority powers in the bill, how discretion might be exercised and how we can have best practice that creates good standards throughout Scotland.

Des McNulty: I thank Sarah Boyack for that intervention.

It is very important that we should have a process that seeks to identify good practice. We have a system that is less prescriptive than it has been in the past, which allows greater innovation. Rhona Brankin made that point. People in the building industry welcome the increased flexibility that the bill will allow, because it will encourage a developing process that will allow us to adapt to higher standards more quickly than was possible under the previous system. Sarah Boyack is right to say that we have to take the public with us. The bill is perhaps seen as technical, but it affects people's lives directly and we have to take that point on board.

A number of excellent points were made throughout the debate and I know that we will return to a lot of them at stage 2. I will address a few issues that members have raised today and which the Transport and the Environment Committee raised. Members might wish to be aware of our thinking.

Margaret Curran gave an undertaking that we would not introduce private verifiers without proper study and consultation. It is only sensible to proceed in that way. There might be opportunities for private verifiers to add something to the system that is not there at present. There are situations in which local authorities might not have relevant expertise, for example in building new stadiums or other complex, innovative or different kinds of buildings. A private verifier system might add to competence in that way.

Bristow Muldoon: An alternative way of dealing with situations in which a small local authority does not have the relevant expertise is for larger neighbouring authorities with larger building control departments to provide the expertise. Does the minister see that as an option?

Des McNulty: That is an option. We want expertise to be shared and pooled, which is why we have set up the new building standards authority as we have.

Another issue regarding private verifiers is worth noting here. Questions have been raised about the performance monitoring of private verifiers and verifiers in general. The Executive has already commissioned research into the performance monitoring of verifiers. Members will be interested to know that the Scottish Association of Chief Building Control Officers was involved at the specification stage and we will continue to consult the professional bodies as the work develops. The work that comes out of the research will form the basis for any subsequent system of monitoring and auditing of verifiers, whether private sector or public sector. We do not believe that there is a need to establish in the bill a commitment to introducing such a system. Work is already in progress and we have given an undertaking, which I am happy to repeat now, that the Executive will establish such a system and fully consult local authorities before doing so.

Linda Fabiani and John Scott raised the issue of fees and charges. We have taken note of the concerns that local authorities have expressed regarding the level of costs that they believe will arise from the proposals. A particular concern of the Scottish Association of Chief Building Control Officers is that the Executive must keep to its intention of setting fees to cover costs. The Transport and the Environment Committee recommended that our research into fees and charges fully take into account local authorities' concerns. Members will be pleased to hear that as part of the current research into fees, the researchers and officials had a valuable meeting with seven chief building control officers on 21 November. That is just one illustration of the continuing dialogue that we want to maintain with stakeholders.

Robert Brown and Murdo Fraser raised points about letters of comfort. It is likely that the building standards assessment will be used where a letter of comfort is sought. It is possible that the assessment will include a form of words that is similar to those contained in some letters of comfort, but that is a matter of detail that will need to be considered in consultation with stakeholders.

The move to expanded functional standards is constructed in a way that will not lead to any reduction in minimum standards. That point needs to be reinforced, because it is important. We want to provide detailed guidance on how building standards can be met. The guidance will be based on existing mandatory technical standards. It is anticipated that the vast majority of owners will rely on the guidance. Where owners choose to use alternative methods, local authorities will remain responsible for ensuring that building standards are met. Where local authorities fail to enforce appropriate standards, Scottish ministers can direct them to do so.

Concerns were raised about disability. I want to make it clear that the Executive's intention is that accessibility to buildings will be mandatory in the building regulations that are established in the new system. Indeed, the new hierarchy of standards and guidance will give designers the freedom to produce innovative solutions to issues of disabled access. The new system will continue to provide the basis for ensuring that existing high standards are maintained and we will have the power to direct authorities to ensure that the current standards are enforced appropriately.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The minister is in his last minute and a half.

Linda Fabiani: Does the minister have a view on how the guidance will set out how local authorities deal with relaxations of buildings standards when they relate to access for disabled people?

Des McNulty: Our expectation is that there will be far fewer relaxations. We are moving the power to relax regulations from local authorities to the central body. That will lead to fewer relaxations.

I have not had time to address a number of other points, such as the issue of how we can improve safety standards in the way in which we develop the regulations, which Bristow Muldoon mentioned. The fact that the bill allows us to do interesting and innovative things is an important attribute. I will consider Kenny MacAskill's suggestion about broadband, because that is part of the range of issues that we should examine. We will need to explore whether it will be possible to achieve that within the framework of the bill or whether other mechanisms will be needed. The new, more flexible framework will give us opportunities to consider how we might proceed with the development of standards, with the aim of getting better-quality buildings and a better system of regulation.

In conclusion, I am grateful that there is complete consensus that the bill is a good thing. I ask members to support its general principles.

Building (Scotland) Bill:
Financial Resolution

11:01

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Mr George Reid): The next item of business is consideration of motion S1M-3456, on the financial resolution in respect of the Building (Scotland) Bill.

Motion moved,

That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Parliament resulting from the Building (Scotland) Bill, agrees to—

(a) any increase in expenditure payable out of the Scottish Consolidated Fund in consequence of the Act, and

(b) any charge imposed, and any payment required to be made, by or under the Act.—[Peter Peacock.]

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The question on the motion will be put at decision time.


Criminal Justice Bill

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Mr George Reid): The next item of business is a debate on motion S1M-3671, in the name of Mr Jim Wallace, on the Criminal Justice Bill, which is proposed United Kingdom legislation. I invite those members who wish to contribute to the debate to press their request-to-speak buttons now. It would be helpful if members who are leaving the chamber would do so quickly and quietly.

11:02

The Deputy Minister for Justice (Hugh Henry): The Criminal Justice Bill, which was introduced at Westminster on 21 November, represents the UK Government's proposals to bring about change across a range of provision in the criminal justice system in England and Wales. It is inevitable that such a bill raises many issues.

However, in the context of today's debate and the motion before the Parliament, most of those matters need not concern us. The motion seeks to permit the UK Parliament to legislate on matters in the bill that are within devolved competence and which it is proposed to extend to Scotland. The fact that those matters are limited to a few areas is not surprising, given that the bill is essentially about proposed changes in England and Wales rather than in Scotland. At this stage, it would be useful to highlight those areas, for the sake of clarity.

Part 1 of the bill makes provision to amend section 2 of the Criminal Justice Act 1987, so that an appropriate person who carries out a search where serious criminal activity related to fraud is suspected, and who is accompanied by police officers, has the same powers as the police in relation to executing the warrant and seizing anything to which the warrant relates. Although the provision relates to fraud investigations that have a locus in England and Wales, section 2 already applies to Scotland. That is to enable effective action to be taken quickly in a situation in which it becomes clear that there might be valuable information in Scotland that is relevant to the case.

The purpose of the amendment of the 1987 act is to enable someone who might have a particular expertise—in computing or finance, for example—to contribute effectively to the search. A police officer might not have the specialist expertise that is required to identify criminal material that might be held on a computer hard drive. A financial expert would be much more able than a police officer to assess the significance of financial documents. It is therefore proposed that the amended provisions should apply in Scotland. I should point out that fraud investigations that have a locus in Scotland are carried out under Scottish legislation—the Criminal Law (Consolidation) (Scotland) Act 1995—and that there are reciprocal arrangements that allow our authorities to initiate searches south of the border.

In parts 9, 10 and 13, the bill makes provision in relation to reporting restrictions. The proposed provision relates to proposals in England and Wales for a prosecution right of appeal against judicial rulings that terminate a case early and for the ability to bring fresh prosecutions in serious cases, where there is new evidence that might cast doubt on an acquittal. There is also provision in connection with the holding of preparatory hearings in certain fraud cases. That provision already extends to Scotland. The purpose of the re-enactment of those provisions in the bill is to extend them to Northern Ireland. The aim of the provisions is to ensure that fair judicial process takes place, for example, by ensuring that potential juries will not be influenced by the media and that they will be time limited.

Part 12 makes extensive provision on sentencing. I must mention two matters in that regard, although the amendments and re-enactments concerned maintain the status quo as far as Scotland is concerned. The first relates to situations in which a suspended sentence that has been given out in England or Wales is breached in Scotland. The bill seeks to re-enact provisions that impose a duty on the court in Scotland to intimate the breach to the court in England or Wales that gave out the original sentence, provided that the court in Scotland is aware of the suspended sentence. The second relates to situations in which it is proposed that a sentencing provision within the European Communities Act 1972, which applies to Scotland, is to be changed, but only with regard to England and Wales.

The Executive believes that it makes good sense for the provisions in the bill that are within devolved competence, and which it is proposed should extend to Scotland, to be legislated for in the UK Parliament.

In relation to some of the bill's provisions, although there is what might be described as a rearrangement of the furniture within existing statutory provision in England and Wales, arrangements in Scotland are left unchanged. That is the case with the provisions that relate to sentencing and reporting restrictions in certain preparatory hearings. The Executive believes that it makes sense for those provisions within devolved competence to be re-included in the bill, where no change in relation to Scotland is proposed and where there are no other issues at hand.

In the interests of combating serious financial crime, it makes sense for the proposed changes for search operations in connection with serious fraud to extend to Scotland.

Although the provisions on reporting restrictions in relation to prosecution appeals and the proposal to allow fresh trials in England and Wales are new proposals, it is already accepted that—in the overall interests of justice—it is correct, in certain circumstances, that the media should not report certain things at certain times. Such matters are dealt with generally under the Contempt of Court Act 1981, but there are other specific provisions that relate to criminal proceedings in which children are involved, for example.

Members will have personal views on the merits or demerits of the proposals on prosecution appeals and fresh trials.

Christine Grahame (South of Scotland) (SNP): I seek clarification on part 9. I am reading the Executive's memorandum on the bill, which says:

"Both the trial judge and the Court of Appeal will have power to vary the restriction"—

on reporting—

"after taking into account any objections from the defendant."

Is it the Court of Appeal in England that is being referred to?

Hugh Henry: I will clarify that point in my summing up.

I doubt that anyone could argue with the proposition that, if such reporting restrictions are agreed to in England and Wales, in the interests of justice, they should apply throughout the UK, according to the same timetable. If that is agreed, the only realistic means of achieving that goal is by including the provisions in relation to Scotland in the bill.

It can fairly be said that the matters that fall within devolved competence in the bill are straightforward and limited and do not have any significant implications for Scots law. They are a good example of why the Sewel convention exists. Therefore, I hope that the Parliament will support the motion.

I move,

That the Parliament agrees that the provisions in the Criminal Justice Bill that relate to devolved matters should be considered by the UK Parliament.

11:09

Michael Matheson (Central Scotland) (SNP): The minister will be well aware of the Scottish National Party's concerns about the use of Sewel motions. Although it was intended that the mechanism would be used on the odd occasion, the Executive now appears to use it frequently. Four Sewel motions have been moved in three weeks.

Today's Sewel motion seeks to obtain the Parliament's agreement that Westminster should legislate on devolved matters. It is interesting to note that the second reading of the Criminal Justice Bill has already taken place in Westminster—it was voted on last night. Before the Scottish Parliament has had an opportunity to debate the issue, Westminster is proceeding with its consideration of the bill.

Another matter for concern is that the issues pertaining to the Criminal Justice Bill have never been discussed in the four meetings that Scottish Executive ministers have had with Home Office ministers over the past couple of years. I wonder why that is the case.

Phil Gallie (South of Scotland) (Con): As the bill has received only its second reading south of the border, is it not the case that there will be plenty of time for ministers and members to table amendments at the committee stage, which means that there is no insult to the Scottish Parliament?

Michael Matheson: It may be true that there is still an opportunity to amend the bill, but this Parliament should at least be allowed the courtesy of coming to an agreement on the issue before Westminster decides to move ahead with it. Ministers seem to have decided to leave the matter to Westminster.

The Executive's memorandum on the bill states:

"The Bill itself is concerned with changes to the criminal justice system in England and Wales, and there are no substantive changes to Scots law."

That may be true, but that is not to say that the bill will not have a substantial impact on Scots law. I will pick up on a couple of the issues, which I hope that the minister will be able to clarify.

Schedule 20 to the bill contains provisions to increase the sentence for a number of offences in connection with category C drugs from five years to 14 years. All members would recognise the need to take a tough stance in tackling drug dealing within our communities, but will the minister clarify how section 1(3)(d) is to be applied? The bill will make it an offence for property owners knowingly to permit or suffer the use of controlled drugs within their properties. Does that mean that someone who runs a hostel for the homeless and suffers the use of cannabis on their premises could face a 14-year jail sentence? Might parents face a similar jail term if they suffer the use of cannabis by their 19-year-old in their room upstairs? Some prison governors have said to me off the record that drugs are a necessary evil within our prison system. Will the bill mean that some prison governors could face a jail sentence? I hope that the minister will clarify exactly how that provision will be implemented.

The bill will also introduce reporting restrictions that have drawn considerable concern from a number of parties. The restrictions that the bill proposes are draconian and go well beyond those that have previously been imposed in Scotland. The National Union of Journalists in Scotland has expressed concern that the proposals lack clarity and could cause uncertainty. The bill suggests that the procedure for the reporting restrictions on prosecution appeals and retrials will apply to England and Wales but not to Scotland, although the reporting restrictions for a case in England and Wales would also apply in Scotland. How will that work? A national Scottish paper that has an office in England will be under the jurisdiction of the English courts. However, if a Scottish paper or magazine that does not have a base anywhere in England were to choose to report the case, it would be outwith the jurisdiction of the English courts. Would it therefore be for the Scottish courts to implement such an order if it were granted by an English court? I hope that the minister will take the opportunity to explain exactly how that provision will apply.

The provisions on reporting restrictions need to be read in conjunction with section 60(10), which states that the proceedings can be instituted, in England and Wales, only by or with the consent of the Attorney General or, in Northern Ireland, by or with the consent of the Attorney General for Northern Ireland. What provision is there for the Solicitor General for Scotland or the Lord Advocate to be involved in deciding whether a case should be instituted? There appears to be no suggestion that any such safeguard will be provided for in Scotland.

The minister will be aware that the Contempt of Court Act 1981 already provides a number of measures that provide restrictions on reporting where that is necessary. We should listen to Scotland's leading judge, Lord Rodger, who is the Lord Justice General and President of the Court of Session. He has stated that such orders under the 1981 act should be "no wider than necessary". However, the bill appears to intend that a blanket ban will be applied through the reporting restrictions that it will introduce. I hope that the minister will clarify how the restrictions on the media are to be applied.

In conclusion, if ministers or other members are under any illusion that Scots MPs in Westminster are dealing with the issue effectively, they should know that, during the bill's second reading yesterday, only two such Labour MPs attended the debate for half an hour. No Scots Lib Dem MPs bothered to turn up for the debate, nor did the Scots Tory MP. The only Scots MP to contribute to the debate on the Criminal Justice Bill was an SNP member, Annabel Ewing. As we know, the only people who are interested in protecting the interests of the Scottish justice system are SNP members.

11:15

Bill Aitken (Glasgow) (Con): As the minister rather humorously—and not without a touch of irony—conceded yesterday, the Conservatives will always back proposals that ensure that the voice of the victim is heard above that of the criminal. As such, we will certainly support today's motion on the Criminal Justice Bill. It is significant that our colleagues south of the border have generally welcomed the bill, although they have flagged up the difficulties that will potentially arise from the proposals on trial by jury, double jeopardy and the provision of information relating to previous convictions prior to a determination of guilt.

Some of the proposals, such as those relating to double jeopardy, are contentious, but the minister has correctly pointed out that those will not apply to Scotland. We welcome the Sewel motion for the very reason that the bill will not impinge greatly on Scots law. Scots law may have its little imperfections but, for all that, it is probably the best legal system in the world. It does not require much adjustment from other jurisdictions.

In the main, the bill's provisions do not relate to the jurisdiction of the Scottish Parliament, but a number of the measures that the bill will introduce are sensible and should be implemented here. The one spectacular omission is the bill's proposals on dealing with the collection of fines south of the border. I seem to recall that, when I suggested similar proposals in this Parliament, they received scant respect or agreement from the Labour-Liberal coalition. Perhaps for once, the coalition should listen to what is being said down south and learn from it.

The minister mentioned the Criminal Justice Act 1987, which already applies in Scotland, and how the proposed amendment to section 2 of that act will provide an enabling power. When the minister sums up, will he confirm that the term "document" in that section of that act includes computer records? The wording of the section is currently rather open, so I suggest that it would be advantageous if that could be looked at, as it was previously necessary to do so after yet another problem at the now infamous Linlithgow sheriff court, which heard a case that went to appeal.

I do not share Michael Matheson's foreboding about the operation of part 9 of the bill, which includes provisions on media restrictions. It is probably better that the Criminal Justice Bill deal with the issue rather than the Contempt of Court Act 1981 because the terms of the 1981 act are vague and have been open to varying interpretations. The bill undoubtedly tightens up those provisions.

We have heard Mr Matheson and his colleagues before on the subject of Sewel motions. On this side of the house, we have no difficulty with them and we believe that there is no dramatic requirement to revisit the operation of the Scotland Act 1998. However, in this instance, I concede to Mr Matheson that the timing of the debate down south was perhaps rather unfortunate.

In general, we welcome the bill and believe that it should be imposed. I point out to Mr Matheson that all prosecutions in Scotland are required to be carried out in the name of the Lord Advocate, so there would be a Scottish input into a prosecution that was carried out due to a breach of the media restrictions. Basically, there is no particular problem on that issue. The legislation, such as it is, is to be generally welcomed. It will impinge in a very limited manner on Scots law.

11:20

George Lyon (Argyll and Bute) (LD): The Liberal Democrats, too, support the Sewel motion in Jim Wallace's name on the UK Criminal Justice Bill. I do not doubt that my colleague Simon Hughes would have been at the Westminster debate—the Liberal Democrats at Westminster support many of the proposals in the bill. In particular, they support custody-plus orders, which offer an opportunity for more effective sentencing, provided that the probation service is properly funded and that sentencers make better use of probation-based alternatives to custody.

However, my Westminster colleagues will be disputing the Government's basic assertion that the criminal justice system is skewed in favour of the offender. They believe that the Government is undermining essential judicial safeguards for populist reasons, as Bill Aitken suggested. My colleagues will accept the arguments in favour of non-retrospective abolition of double jeopardy but they will strongly oppose the proposals for the disclosure of previous convictions and the abolition of juries for complex cases.

Michael Matheson: Will the Liberal Democrat spokesperson be following his Westminster colleagues who voted against the bill last night?

George Lyon: No. That was Westminster; this is the Scottish Parliament. Mr Matheson does not seem to be able to distinguish between the two. The motion before the chamber is a Sewel motion that will allow my Westminster colleagues to have input into the bill. Westminster is the right place to argue the points that I mentioned; we will make sure that we are judicious in arguing the points that we believe should be changed. My Westminster colleagues are likely to argue that the public's main concern is not trial procedure but local crime rates and effective policing.

With regard to matters of devolved competence, the proposals all appear to be sensible and should be implemented UK-wide. They deserve the Parliament's support. I restate the Liberal Democrats' support for the Sewel motion.

11:22

Brian Fitzpatrick (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab): In supporting the motion, I remind the chamber of some of the reforms of the criminal justice system that are making progress in the rest of the country. Labour members and, I suspect, others in the chamber will be looking for similar progress in Scotland, because those matters are of equal concern in Scotland, not least in relation to part 10 of the Criminal Justice Bill, which seeks to make provision for the retrial of serious offences where there is compelling new evidence and a fair trial can be secured.

It is important that reporting restrictions can be properly imposed in the rest of the United Kingdom. That should not be subverted by what takes place in Scotland. Those provisions relate to the securing of justice throughout the United Kingdom and we should be pleased to support them.

On the provisions for retrials, we should not just tut and move on. We should not just extend sympathy to the Lawrence family and others in similar situations and then do nothing. We have a highly adversarial criminal justice system, but it must not be reduced to a mere game. It is a justice system and justice has failed when the guilty walk free as well as when the innocent are wrongly convicted. I understand from a written answer that we will be keeping the proposals for the rest of the UK under consideration. I suggest to the minister that early consideration would be welcomed.

I also urge ministers to consider the proposals for the rest of the UK on presumption against bail for people who have tested positive for class A drugs and who refuse treatment.

Ministers should also consider part 9 of the bill, which provides for circumstances in which a criminal trial has been halted and a ruling is made that the trial should be terminated. Ministers will be aware of my concerns about the impact of the majority decision in R v (1) Her Majesty's Advocate and (2) the Advocate General for Scotland, a judgment that was delivered by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council on 28 November. Aside from the somewhat unusual comments by Lord Rodger—incidentally, he ceased being the Lord Justice General for Scotland some considerable time ago—and Lord Hope, Lord Steyn's comments made clear the potentially draconian effects of that decision for prosecutors. I hope that ministers will respond to that in early course.

All those matters might have been appropriate for discussion about the Criminal Justice Bill and what we are doing about it. When we come to the chamber, however, we know that all we will hear is an argument about Sewel motions—it is groundhog day again. The SNP does not want to talk about the substance or the principle—

Christine Grahame: Oh God.

Brian Fitzpatrick: Ms Grahame makes the usual sighing noises from a sedentary position.

Christine Grahame: Only when Brian Fitzpatrick is speaking.

Brian Fitzpatrick: Christine Grahame will not rise to the challenge. We do not hear a word about the SNP's position on the details of the bill. Does the SNP want to duplicate the provisions? Does it want different provisions? We heard from Michael Matheson that the provisions on class C drugs are too severe. Does the SNP want more lenient provisions and a more lenient regime in Scotland? Of course, it will not own up to any of that. All its members will do is come to the chamber, have their usual whinge and bleat and then move on. We are told that whingeing and moaning no longer feature on the nationalist agenda for the Parliament. Sadly, the evidence for that is lacking.

I am grateful to Bill Aitken for giving the view from St Andrew's Square and I am grateful for his pragmatic view that we should consider the efficacy of the provisions. If other members want to exercise their constitutional obsession and navel gaze, we should let them. Those of us who are interested in securing justice and playing our part in the United Kingdom in relation to serious crime, serious fraud and the like should support the motion.

11:26

Phil Gallie (South of Scotland) (Con): My contribution will be brief because I recognise that the effects on Scotland of the Criminal Justice Bill are minimal.

I ask the minister to comment on the interaction between the provisions in the Criminal Justice Bill on search warrants and provisions in the Crime (International Co-operation) Bill, which we will be considering later.

Bill Aitken referred to the fact that my colleagues down south have some reservations about double jeopardy. However, I would have liked more in the Criminal Justice Bill to be carried over into Scotland in that respect. I have argued strongly over many years about double jeopardy. I will work with my colleagues down south and try to persuade them to change their view, although I realise that they will have the final word on the bill.

I recognise the necessity of reporting restrictions; it would be nonsense not to go along with those. However, although we are talking about the rights of the prosecution, I am led to think about whether the rights of the defence should also be protected. I refer to an abuse case in Ayrshire, in which the judge determined that he would end the trial early. That meant that the accused did not get the chance to prove their innocence. There was still a stain on their names because they had not gone through the whole judicial process.

However, I recognise that, in that case, the application of reporting restrictions might have worked to the disadvantage of the defendants. At the time, the Lord Advocate stated that all was well with the prosecution. I have since found out that the two individuals who made the allegations have been paid something in the region of £22,000 for the failure of the judicial system to give them justice. In my view, the situation should have been reversed. I suspect that that is not relevant to today's debate, Presiding Officer, but I thank you for allowing me to raise the issue.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We move to some brief final comments. I call George Lyon for the Liberal Democrats.

George Lyon: I pass.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I call Lord James Douglas-Hamilton for the Conservatives

11:29

Lord James Douglas-Hamilton (Lothians) (Con): First, I apologise to the minister for not being present at the beginning of the debate—I was in Glasgow at the launch by the First Minister and the Deputy First Minister of the report by the cross-party working group on religious hatred, of which I was a member.

I am glad to speak in support of the Sewel motion on the Criminal Justice Bill. On 14 November, I assured the then Deputy Minister for Justice that we would give a fair wind to measures that are designed to give greater protection to the public and to make the voices of victims louder than those of criminals. Some of the proposals, such as the one on double jeopardy, are contentious. I note that at this stage they do not relate to Scotland. If it is proposed to relate them to Scotland, it would be appropriate to put them forward in the context of Scottish Parliament legislation.

Part 10 of the Criminal Justice Bill relates to double jeopardy. Those provisions are not being applied to Scotland, but the proposal to introduce reporting restrictions, such that the media cannot report an application for a retrial or the details, will extend to Scotland. The aim of the Government is to avoid prejudicing future trials. I would be grateful if the minister could reassure me that such restrictions will be applied only before the application has been dismissed or before the retrial has been brought to an end.

If the minister has time, he might like to explain to us the technical difference between a deferred sentence in Scotland and a suspended sentence in England and Wales. It seems that in practice there is relatively little to choose between them. However, I understand that the relevant measure is a sensible one: it is a re-enactment and an enabling measure that will allow criminal measures to be kept up to date throughout Britain.

There are a number of drafting amendments—such as the one to take into account the new definition of community orders in England and Wales—to ensure that sentences will apply and be implemented effectively north and south of the border.

The key to the Sewel motion is that there are no fundamental changes to Scottish law. We will be content to let the Sewel motion go through.

11:32

Christine Grahame (South of Scotland) (SNP): Well, here we are again. We missed a birthday last week: it was happy 40th birthday to Sewel motions. I have a list of Sewel motions from the Scottish Parliament information centre website; it comprises sheets and sheets. What Donald Dewar thought would be a trickle has become a veritable flood. The SPICe website says that a Sewel convention is

"A colloquial term sometimes used".

Well, it is used very frequently in this chamber.

There are problems with Sewel motions. First, I will tackle the jurisdictional and constitutional issues that arise. One issue arose from a question that I asked ministers about which court would deal with the appeal process. I was told that it would be the Court of Appeal. If that court is the final court of appeal for anything, that will be in breach of the treaty of union, because the final court of appeal in Scotland on criminal matters is the High Court, sitting as the court of appeal. That is the first issue that arises from the Criminal Justice Bill. The unionists say that the bill does not impact on Scots law, but it goes to the heart of the treaty of union. I would like some answers.

Secondly, on reporting restrictions, it seems that the law of the—I always forget the English word for it.

Brian Fitzpatrick: Thingummy.

Christine Grahame: Brian Fitzpatrick can call it that if he likes; my mum was English, and she was not my enemy.

The bill encroaches on the Scots law of the interdict by the back door. At the moment, injunctions—that is the word—in England do not apply to Scotland. That has been a problem for English jurisdiction in relation to Scottish newspapers based in Scotland. By extending the law to Scotland, the bill will encroach on the interdict procedure in Scotland. That is another jurisdictional issue.

Brian Fitzpatrick: Will the member give way?

Christine Grahame: No, I have no time for Mr Fitzpatrick at any time. I do not want to hear from him.

We have problems with the scrutiny of the Criminal Justice Bill. I have hardly had an opportunity to look at the bill, because it has been rushed to this Parliament. It is being put through in England in a rush. There is no chance to look at it. Legislation in Scotland goes to a committee; it has a stage 1 procedure, a stage 2 procedure and a stage 3 procedure. There is also the opportunity to take written and oral evidence. What evidence have we had in this chamber about how our courts feel about the Criminal Justice Bill, how our sheriffs feel about it and how the Faculty of Advocates feels about it? We do not know how they feel. There are huge problems with scrutinising the bill.

We should not just sit here rubber-stamping Sewel motion after Sewel motion. Of course, I expect nothing else from Bill Aitken, who does not want us to do anything here. He wants us to pack up and go back to his home, which is Westminster. As for George Lyon, he speaks for the Janus-like Liberal Democrats, who have two faces: a face for Westminster and a face for here. They are in opposition down the road but they are going to get married up here. They can face both ways, but neither way is worth listening to. As for the Executive, it is letting the little independence that we have with devolution trickle through our fingers because of the flood of Sewel motions back to Westminster. Before the end of the debate, I want an answer to the question about the treaty of union.

11:36

Hugh Henry: I doubt that I will be the source of definitive arguments on the treaty of union. At least, I could not give an answer that Christine Grahame and others would accept. I will return to that matter shortly.

Lord James Douglas-Hamilton asked about, among other things, the difference between a deferred sentence in Scotland and a suspended sentence in England. Far be it from me to give a legal tutorial or legal revision to someone of Lord James's expertise and experience, but I believe that, in Scotland, a deferred sentence means that no sentence is passed and the accused returns to court later for the court to determine whether they have been of good behaviour. In England, with a suspended sentence, the court imposes a sentence, which will bite if the accused behaves badly. If there is anything else that we can help with at a later stage, we surely will.

Phil Gallie and others referred to measures that they would like to see introduced in Scotland. It is interesting that the Conservatives had 18 years in which to enact some of the measures that he desperately wishes to be introduced. The Labour Government at Westminster is to be commended for moving on some of the measures that the Conservatives chose to ignore over the years.

Bill Aitken: Does the minister agree that there is some inconsistency with regard to the collection of fines? The Westminster Government is prepared to take the steps that I have proposed in this Parliament, yet the minister and his colleagues have steadfastly opposed doing so. Can he explain that inconsistency?

Hugh Henry: It is easily explained: we have a different legal system and a different set of political responsibilities. The Westminster Government is doing what is appropriate for England and Wales. We are doing what is appropriate for Scotland. The Westminster Government will learn from some of the things that we do here and, equally, there will be times when we learn from what it does in England. If anything comes from the English experience that is of benefit to Scotland, we will reflect on that.

Bill Aitken probably misquoted me when he said that I gave him some faint praise for supporting the victim ahead of the criminal. I was probably referring more to his enthusiasm for draconian sentencing in all cases and at all times. However, I confirm for him that the Home Office proposes that the word "document" should include computer material; it covers anything that is listed in the warrant. If there are any other issues, I will investigate them.

I confirm for Christine Grahame—to whom I passed a note, but I will confirm it for the record—that the Court of Appeal that is referred to in the Criminal Justice Bill is the Court of Appeal in England, as she said.

There have been some useful, specific and technical comments from SNP members. Inevitably, however, some of their comments were predictable political posturing—SNP members have not welcomed the opportunity to improve legislative operations in Scotland.

I was intrigued by Michael Matheson's conclusion that, because Annabel Ewing was the only Scottish member who spoke in the debate and because she is an SNP member, that means that the SNP is the only party interested in criminal justice. If we accept that, we must draw the conclusion that, because no SNP member participated in the debates on the minimum wage, the SNP has no interest in the minimum wage.

Michael Matheson raised a number of issues, which I will try to address. On reporting restrictions and clarity, the question is not about the jurisdiction of the court. The bill provides for reporting restrictions throughout the United Kingdom—for example, the Edinburgh and London editions of any newspaper would be affected.

In relation to comments on hostel owners and parents, it has been said that the provision in the bill increases the maximum penalty available to courts. However, the sentence passed in any specific case is a matter for the court, which will take into account the particular circumstances of the case.

Christine Grahame talked about the Court of Appeal. The equivalent reporting restrictions made, for example, by a Scottish court under section 47 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 will apply in England.

Generally, although there might be particular issues of concern—

Christine Grahame: Will the minister take an intervention?

Hugh Henry: I am just finishing.

What has been proposed has not only been largely welcomed, but is of benefit to us, despite the SNP's concerns about Sewel motions.


Crime (International Co-operation) Bill

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Mr George Reid): The next item of business is a debate on motion S1M-3670, in the name of Jim Wallace, on the Crime (International Co-operation) Bill, which is UK legislation. Members who wish to contribute to the debate should press their request-to-speak buttons now.

11:42

The Deputy Minister for Justice (Hugh Henry): The Crime (International Co-operation) Bill, introduced in the House of Lords on 19 November, represents an important new step in the fight against international crime.

The measures in the bill will lead to better cross-party—I hope so, yes—I meant to say cross-border anti-crime co-operation. They will speed up the process of tackling international organised crime, and by improving the methods of co-operation that are in place to get the evidence needed to conduct cross-border investigations and prosecutions, they will enhance the ability of law enforcement agencies to deal effectively with some of the most serious of criminal activity.

In particular, as far as Scotland is concerned, both outgoing and incoming requests for assistance will now be dealt with here, rather than having to be routed through London, thus speeding up and making more effective mutual co-operation as far as we are concerned.

The bill, in four parts, is a comprehensive package of measures that will improve and modernise international co-operation between law enforcement and other agencies.

Part 1 provides for a range of mutual assistance measures in criminal matters, including assistance in obtaining evidence and freezing it where there is a danger that it might disappear. New measures will help in the fight against financial crime—and money laundering in particular—by enhancing co-operation with European Union partners with regard to providing information about banking transactions where criminal activity is suspected.

Part 2 makes provision so that extra-territorial jurisdiction is taken over certain offences against British citizens and the premises and staff of UK diplomatic missions abroad in relation to terrorist acts and threats.

Part 3 reforms the law so that drivers who are banned in a country other than their own cannot continue to drive in another country.

Part 4 makes a variety of provisions. For example, it makes provision for the authorisation of urgent cross-border surveillance operations by overseas officers in tightly controlled circumstances, and it brings in new measures to combat fraud.

The bill consists of a mix of reserved and devolved provisions across a range of international obligations. The matters in the bill that would be within devolved competence have been detailed in the memorandum published by the Executive. However, at this point, it might be useful to summarise those as follows, in relation to the various international obligations.

Many of the provisions in chapter 2 of the Schengen agreement, the 2000 mutual legal assistance convention and its protocol, and the framework decision on the freezing of evidence, would be within the competence of the Scottish Parliament, relating as they do to the practical details of giving mutual assistance between different jurisdictions. The legislative provisions necessary to meet these obligations are in part 1 of the bill.

Parts 2 and 3 of the bill deal with matters that are reserved to the UK Parliament, but part 4 contains two measures within devolved competence. They are the provisions needed to counter fraud, as required by the framework decision on non-cash means of payment, and the obligations of Schengen article 40 with respect to urgent cross-border surveillance by the police, where serious criminal activity is suspected.

The bill is a complicated mix of reserved and devolved provisions reaching across a multiplicity of agreements and the Executive believes that there are good reasons why those should be implemented in the UK in one piece of legislation. First, it is crucial that there is consistency of approach throughout the UK when dealing with organised crime. Big-time criminals are adept at operating across borders and seeking thus to escape detection. That is a highly significant consideration, for instance, in effective police surveillance operations. It is not difficult to imagine that an international criminal might seek to exploit different arrangements between Scotland and England to further his activities and escape detection. That is why it is necessary to ensure that the conditions attaching to urgent cross-border surveillance operations in the UK are the same north and south of the border. In practical and operational terms that position also recognises the potential that, although a foreign surveillance operation might start south of the border, it could feasibly end up in Scotland, and vice versa.

Secondly, the UK legislation would be more effective from the point of view of practitioners and the courts. The bill makes provision to implement the necessary measures in some seven mutual assistance agreements, ranging from the agreed UK participation in Schengen to the convention on driving disqualification. The main issue for practitioners and the courts in dealing with major cross-border criminal activity is having a clear set of implementing provisions across the UK. That is a practical matter essentially, but it is important nonetheless, so that a clear procedure is set out in one piece of legislation should a rapid response be required to international criminal activity that might have a locus in both jurisdictions.

There was extensive discussion of the general use of the Sewel convention during the debate on the Extradition Bill that was held in the chamber on 21 November and there has been further discussion in the preceding debate today on the UK Criminal Justice Bill. There is no need to repeat that general discussion here.

As was observed in those previous debates, it was anticipated from the outset that there would be circumstances where the Executive and the Parliament would want to ask the UK Parliament to legislate for Scotland on devolved matters. The key point is that there must be a UK-wide bill anyway to implement the measures that are reserved, and in my remarks, I hope that I have set out a good case for why it makes sense to include in the bill matters that are within devolved competence.

I move,

That the Parliament recognises the need for the United Kingdom to ensure compliance with the international obligations for which the Crime (International Co-operation) Bill makes provision and agrees that those provisions in the bill that relate to devolved matters should be considered by the UK Parliament.

11:48

Michael Matheson (Central Scotland) (SNP): We have already been asked to pass a Sewel motion on a House of Commons bill, although Westminster is pressing ahead with it. Now we are being asked to pass a Sewel motion for a House of Lords bill. That great democratic institution is dealing with the bill that we debate today. At least the House of Commons, unlike the House of Lords, has democratic legitimacy and accountability to some extent.

The bill is a result of EU legislation and I turn to the issue of EU legislation in the area of justice and home affairs. Scotland's problem is that European legislation on international crime is decided in secret by the Council of Ministers with the European Parliament playing no more than a consultative role. As Scotland is not represented on the Council of Ministers, we have no opportunity to affect the development of the European law that we will subsequently be required to implement.

We would have that opportunity, however, if Scotland were a member of the Council of Ministers as an independent nation. Although we might not be able to affect the development of EU legislation, we have an important role to play in its implementation.

The Executive's memorandum on the bill states

"The purpose of this Bill is to implement binding international obligations. There would therefore be little or no scope for the Scottish Parliament to legislate in a way which was significantly different to the provisions contained in this Bill."

That is not entirely correct. Framework decisions are binding on member states in terms of what they should achieve, but they leave member states or national authorities to choose the means by which they pursue that objective. That is contained in article 34(2)(b) of the Maastricht treaty, which I am sure all members have brought with them today. The Parliament therefore has a role to play in the implementation of such international obligations.

Pauline McNeill (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab): Michael Matheson said in the earlier debate on the Criminal Justice Bill that his party's position is that an independent Scotland would be an individual member state. If he has his wish—I am sure that he will not—what provisions does he believe would be different from those that are set out in the Crime (International Co-operation) Bill?

Michael Matheson: The important thing is that we are given the opportunity to decide how European decisions are implemented in Scotland. I shall give an example. The Home Office produced a document on the implementation of the protocol to the convention on mutual assistance in criminal matters. Hugh Henry referred to that protocol, and the bill will introduce that protocol. The Home Office document contained three different options as to how the protocol could be implemented. It chose an option that would, according to the Government, reduce the burden on banks, and the minister referred specifically to banking transactions.

We have a choice as to how we pursue EU legislation that has an effect on our jurisdiction and we should exercise that choice. It is an opportunity that we, as a Parliament, should recognise allows us to ensure that Scottish interests are properly served.

I wish that ministers would take a more active role in Europe, and I would like to spend a moment looking at their record on pursuing justice and home affairs matters in Europe. Over the first five months of the Danish presidency, the Scottish Executive has sent officials to seven meetings or working groups on justice and home affairs issues. The Danish presidency's website shows that there have been 184 such meetings. The Executive has not sent officials to any working party on the Schengen agreement, on substantive criminal law, on criminal civil protection or on terrorism, or to the multi-disciplinary group on organised crime. It has missed most of the working parties on co-operation in criminal matters and on police co-operation.

Given the amount of EU legislation that the bill will introduce, I hope that the minister will explain exactly what role the Executive is playing in the framing of that legislation. He should also tell us whether the Executive is meeting officials and ministers at Westminster, to ensure that whatever decisions are reached at Westminster as to how that legislation is introduced are the best options for Scotland.

I would like the minister to clarify several points in the bill. In clause 7, why is it open to both the prosecuting authority and the judicial authority to request assistance from overseas authorities? What protection is there to ensure that evidence obtained under clause 6 is fairly obtained? Will Scottish courts be able to review the actions of foreign authorities when gathering such evidence?

I would also like him to clarify the role that the information commissioner in Scotland will have in accessing the Schengen information system database. I understand that that system will be used by the information commissioner in London, but it is not clear whether the commissioner here in Scotland will have the same opportunity.

Scotland is disadvantaged as a nation, not only by not being able to be at the top table in developing European legislation, but by the Executive's track record on being represented at meetings relating to justice and home affairs. That record makes it clear that the Executive either chooses to leave it to Westminster or does not even bother turning up to make its voice heard.

11:54

Lord James Douglas-Hamilton (Lothians) (Con): I warmly welcome Hugh Henry's speech. The Sewel motion relating to the Crime (International Co-operation) Bill implements European Union commitments in the area of police and judicial co-operation. The relevant scrutiny committees of both houses of the United Kingdom Parliament have examined the European directive that the bill thoroughly implements. The bill makes legislative changes that will implement those commitments.

We are perfectly happy that the United Kingdom Parliament should deal with the matter, as it is a subject that, in our view, needs to be dealt with on a United Kingdom basis. We must make it clear that the fight against terrorism is being dealt with effectively. That means that we must put in place arrangements for closer co-operation between police forces, customs and intelligence services throughout the European Union. We believe that it is right to aim for meaningful, effective and helpful co-operation.

Our colleagues at Westminster will no doubt distinguish between such co-operation on the one hand and harmonisation, which they could not support, on the other. They will also want to ensure that civil liberties are not undermined. For example, they will want to consider with the utmost caution the provisions to allow police and customs officers from other countries to carry out surveillance in the United Kingdom for five hours without first having had their activities cleared by British authorities. That provision could be amended at Westminster and is contentious.

The parts of the bill that are relevant to Scotland include the following subjects. First, there is the subject of mutual assistance in criminal matters, which relates to orders freezing property and to providing banking information relating to criminal investigations. Although matters relating to money laundering and financial services are reserved to the United Kingdom Parliament, information on bank accounts is a devolved matter, and it makes sense to have a consistent policy to prevent international crime and fraud.

Secondly, with regard to terrorist acts, provision is made so that there is extra-territorial jurisdiction over certain offences against British citizens and the premises of embassies abroad. Similarly, provision is made for jurisdiction over attacks on premises and staff of European Union institutions that are based in the United Kingdom. That is not a devolved matter, but the provisions apply to Scotland and their implementation could well come under the remit of this Parliament.

Thirdly, with regard to driving disqualifications, it must surely be right that such disqualifications should be recognised throughout the European Union. It must be wrong that drivers who are banned in one country can drive in another, and part 3 sorts that out. Again, the implementation of that reserved subject would be dealt with by Scottish law enforcement agencies.

Fourthly, the bill sets out additional measures relating to police co-operation, data protection and the Schengen convention. For example, the information commissioner can obtain access to the Schengen information system and inspect without a warrant. There is also authorisation of cross-border surveillance, required by article 40 of the Schengen agreement. The minister will note the views of my colleagues at Westminster on that.

Many of those provisions will be the subject of considerable debate in the United Kingdom houses of Parliament. We think that that is the appropriate forum for that debate and we are content that that should happen. We recognise that the purpose of approaching international co-operation in tackling crime in the way set out in the bill is to make it harder for criminals and easier for international enforcement agencies. Having a single piece of legislation will assist in the fight against crime, and we support the motion.

11:58

George Lyon (Argyll and Bute) (LD): I pledge the Liberal Democrats' support for the Sewel motion, in Jim Wallace's name, on the Crime (International Co-operation) Bill. The title says it all; it is about co-operation across the EU in tackling crime and terrorism.

As the minister said in his speech, the key provisions are the implementation of the mutual legal assistance provisions of the Schengen convention, the provisions to enable the execution in the EU of orders freezing property and evidence, and the provisions to combat a range of terrorist offences throughout the EU. Those measures reflect the need to tackle crime and terrorism on an EU-wide basis, and they reflect the fact that crime and terrorism neither know nor respect national boundaries. Countries must therefore work together to tackle criminals and terrorists.

The impact of the crimes committed by gangs on a transnational scale is often felt at a local level. That is especially true in the case of drug trafficking. It is therefore essential that there is close co-operation between EU countries to take on international criminal gangs.

Part 4 of the bill implements the Schengen convention in respect of police co-operation, extradition and data protection. As Lord James Douglas-Hamilton rightly highlighted, the bill will give UK police forces access to the Schengen information system, which is a large computer database of criminals and suspected criminals throughout the EU. That is surely a step forward in combating international terrorism and international criminal gangs. Access to such information must strengthen the arm of UK police forces in tackling crime in the UK.

Lord James Douglas-Hamilton raised concerns about hot-pursuit procedures, which would allow officers from a member state to conduct unaccompanied surveillance in another member state for up to five hours. He said that he was concerned about such surveillance on civil liberties grounds, but I think that his concerns were more to do with Euroscepticism. Given the nature of the international terrorism that we are trying to tackle, his concerns are misplaced.

Lord James Douglas-Hamilton: I mentioned concerns that colleagues at Westminster must deal with; they are not necessarily my concerns. In emergencies, it is obvious that police forces must work quickly. I suspect that the issue will be the subject of debate at Westminster.

George Lyon: I was reflecting the views that the member mentioned.

John Wadham, who is the director of the human rights organisation, Liberty, has also expressed concerns. He criticised aspects of the bill and said that

"We have enough problems regulating our own authorities' use of surveillance in the UK"

without giving those powers to foreign police forces.

Those are genuine concerns, but provided that adequate safeguards are put in place, the measures deserve support.

In conclusion, the Liberal Democrats support the Sewel motion.

12:02

Pauline McNeill (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab): I welcome visitors in the gallery from Hillhead Primary School in my constituency. I must be on my best behaviour this morning.

I congratulate Hugh Henry on his appointment as Deputy Minister for Justice. He will already know that the justice remit means that within three days, he will have dealt with two stage 2 debates and two Sewel motions without stopping to think. He will know what I, Christine Grahame, Michael Matheson and other members feel about the remit, which I think we have dealt with reasonably in the past three and a half years or so.

The Crime (International Co-operation) Bill implements several of the UK's outstanding obligations in respect of EU agreements on police and judicial co-operation. The need to tackle serious crime internationally is a crucial aspect of our general approach to criminal justice, because organised crime is conducted across national borders.

The bill was introduced in the House of Lords on 19 November and will implement the UK's partial participation in the Schengen convention, which, as we have heard, facilitates the free movement of persons. The Sewel motion that we are considering is necessary to ensure that there is international co-operation and that respective obligations are the same in the UK and in each European member state.

The principle behind the bill is essentially to ensure that serious crime throughout Europe can be dealt with speedily as and when it happens and without there being barriers to tackling it. The intention is to ensure that such crime can be tackled with the urgency that is needed. Of course, that requires a degree of trust between nations, particularly in respect of allowing surveillance of criminals in order to detect acts of terrorism or similar threats to national security. However, the whole of Europe will benefit by signing up to the measures.

Part 1 of the bill concerns mutual assistance in criminal matters and the provision of information—for example on bank accounts and transactions—when a criminal investigation is on-going. That means that assets can be frozen and, crucially, that orders protecting evidence that might be needed to demonstrate criminal activity can be frozen if necessary. That is essential in international fraud or money-laundering cases.

Part 3 of the bill concerns the convention on driving disqualification, which is a reserved issue. A driver who is banned in one EU country will, in effect, be banned in every EU country. That is crucial for public safety. Perhaps the minister will clarify that the ban and the duration of the ban will be imposed by the relevant court and protected by every other member state.

Among other things, part 4 of the bill extends the list of instruments of payment that are covered by section 5 of the Forgery and Counterfeiting Act 1981 to include bills of exchange and credit and debit cards—in other words, non-cash means of payment.

There is a need to scrutinise constantly the effect of Sewel motions such as the motion under consideration. If EU matters are being considered, the Parliament and its committees should make an input where that is appropriate. However, to deny that international crime is best dealt with on a UK basis is to fail to understand the threats to our society and the extent of drug trafficking, human trafficking, terrorism and threats to national security. Many members understand that human trafficking is a real, live issue, particularly in the EU. Last night, there were raids on eight saunas in Glasgow city centre in my constituency. I am pleased to report that no person was being held in the saunas against their will, although 10 foreign nationals were found in them.

Each Sewel motion should be considered on its own merits and the merits of the motion before us are well established. EU co-operation on criminal justice matters is reaching new heights. Where possible, we should encourage treaties and protocols with countries worldwide, because it goes without saying that serious crime is not confined to European borders.

I support motion S1M-3670, in the name of Jim Wallace.

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): We now proceed to winding-up speeches.

12:06

Phil Gallie (South of Scotland) (Con): This is the third time in two days that I have risen to support the Labour-Liberal Government's proposals. I admit that I am beginning to worry, but I will correct things if I am called to speak on another motion this afternoon.

The minister referred to the complications that surround the Sewel motion. Michael Matheson complained about the number of Sewel motions that go through the Parliament, but that simply underlines the intertwining of the national interests of the Welsh, English, Scots and Northern Irish under the union. Such intertwining brings many benefits.

Hugh Henry suggested that the Conservatives had not achieved all that I would have wanted them to achieve in 18 years. I concede that. I would have been happier had the incoming Labour Government in 1997 implemented Michael Forsyth's proposed criminal justice legislation, which would have done much to alleviate some of the recent problems of rising crime.

I want to consider the Sewel motion and some reasons why support for it is necessary. Part 1 of the bill deals with the freezing of bank accounts. I have a little sympathy with what Michael Matheson said about the consultation process. When we foresee Sewel motions and consultation is to take place in England and Wales only, perhaps Scottish ministers could ensure that consultation is extended to Scotland. That would be fair and right and does not undermine the fact that, ultimately, in this case, a Sewel motion is relevant.

On part 2 of the bill and the movement of terrorists, it would be absolutely ridiculous if we went down one line and people south of the border went down another line so that somebody could move from Newcastle to Duns or vice versa and use legal technicalities to escape justice.

Part 3 of the bill covers a situation of which I was unaware, and that the bill addresses that situation is to its credit. Apparently, a person in Northern Ireland can come to the UK mainland and pick up a mainland driving licence. That is nonsense. Good legislation addresses nonsense, and the bill does so.

I am happy that Scots will derive benefits from a bill that will also affect England, Wales and Northern Ireland. The commonsense approach of a Sewel motion will progress a number of other issues, but I want to return to the Schengen aspect of the bill.

I would never sign up to any move at Westminster or elsewhere to reduce our border controls. Through the bill, the Government south of the border is trying to align the law with Schengen to a degree. I acknowledge that the matter is reserved, but I do not want to go beyond some of the Schengen provisions. Overall, I am happy that our elected representatives—the 72 members of Parliament from Scotland who go south of the border to voice Scotland's opinions on such issues—do their job.

Christine Grahame (South of Scotland) (SNP): The Conservatives have only one MP in Scotland.

Phil Gallie: Sadly, we have only one Conservative MP in Scotland, and I concede that that is far too few. He cannot be everywhere all the time, and when he is not in the House of Commons, he has good reasons. Perhaps the situation can be rectified and we will be able to play a greater part in United Kingdom affairs, to Scotland's benefit.

12:10

Christine Grahame (South of Scotland) (SNP): Of course, I share fully Pauline McNeill's sentiments about tackling international crime. The Scottish National Party supports measures to tackle international crime, which knows no boundaries.

The problem with the Sewel motion is that Scotland will not have the opportunity to scrutinise the Crime (International Co-operation) Bill. My colleague Michael Matheson told members that the Minister for Justice has attended seven out of 184 meetings on justice matters in Europe. We do not have the opportunity to scrutinise the proposals, because we are not represented directly at the Council of Ministers. The Minister for Justice cannot give the distinctive Scottish input on criminal matters, because an English minister goes to the Council. That is a huge problem, particularly for criminal law in Scotland.

I say to Pauline McNeill that the Executive says:

"the purpose of this Bill is to implement binding international obligations. There would therefore be little or no scope for the Scottish Parliament to legislate in a way which was significantly different to the provisions"

in the bill. What the Executive says is not the case. As my colleague Michael Matheson said, framework decisions are binding on member states as to the results to be achieved, but leave the form and method of implementation to states. I will develop briefly Michael Matheson's argument.

The Home Office has issued a document on the protocol that requires European Union member states to locate and provide details of all bank accounts and transactions of a person who is the subject of a serious crime investigation and to monitor the activity of any account that they hold. The Home Office suggests three options for implementing the protocol. The first option is to rely on existing legislation, which would not allow the protocol to be ratified. The UK would be under no obligation to help foreign investigators and they would not have to help the UK. The second option is to legislate in accordance with a minimalist interpretation of the protocol and to allow judges discretion as to whether to grant a warrant for monitoring bank accounts. The third option is to require automatic implementation of requests from foreign investigators to monitor bank accounts.

The Home Office suggests choosing the second, discretionary, option, because it would have lower compliance costs for banks than the third option, as fewer warrants would be granted. Unlike the first option, the second option would allow the protocol to be ratified, so the UK would have reciprocal investigation from other authorities. The Home Office says that, as far as possible, the UK should go for the low-cost option for reciprocal investigation by other countries.

The choice about implementing the protocol is plainly substantial and moral and falls within devolved areas. Given the chance to examine the proposals, Scotland might want to be more helpful to our European partners than the Home Office intends to be and to go for automatic implementation of requests. By not having input, we have surrendered that moral choice and given our power to England, which has chosen the lesser option.

That is why we oppose the Sewel motion. Of course we support international co-operation on criminal matters, but Scotland had the choice to do even more than England appears to be doing.

12:14

Hugh Henry: It is disappointing and regrettable that, for party-political reasons more than anything else, the Scottish National Party opposes the opportunity to increase international co-operation to deal with crime.

It is sometimes difficult to place the matter in context, because particular legal issues have been raised, but it is important to reflect on what the bill will mean for ordinary people in our communities, many of which are blighted by the horrors of drugs. We know that major drug criminals are reliant on being able to operate across borders. The new measures will make an important contribution to our ability to track down drug criminals and to determine whether money laundering, for instance, has been used to conceal the proceeds of crime.

The bill is important because it will enable the UK to implement several outstanding international commitments. It will also help to deliver practical, effective action against those who are engaged in serious crime. International inquiries into serious crime face practical difficulties because of the need to operate across different jurisdictions. We want to do all that we can to support cross-border inquiries to ensure that big-time criminals cannot exploit national boundaries in the way that was mentioned earlier.

Christine Grahame: If the Executive had the choice and it wants to do as much as it can, should not we be going for the third option? That would allow automatic implementation of requests from foreign investigators to monitor bank accounts.

Hugh Henry: We have before us today a series of measures that will make an effective difference. If there are measures that we can take ourselves from time to time or measures that we can take as part of UK-wide legislation, that will be the right thing to do. The issue before us today is whether we are prepared to accept the bill. When we are asked whether we believe that it will make a difference, we say that we believe that it will. Those who refuse to accept the opportunities that the bill presents will have to answer for that themselves.

It is also important to remember that we are debating reciprocal arrangements that will benefit our law enforcement agencies if they need to get urgent assistance from a partner country. It will also help to deter overseas elements from coming to the UK to carry out criminal activity.

In addition to the major issues that are before us, some small anomalies are also dealt with, for example the unacceptable anomaly that people with a driving conviction in Northern Ireland are not banned from driving in the rest of the UK, which Pauline McNeill and Phil Gallie mentioned. Pauline McNeill raised other issues and I will try to give further background on them, but if I do not answer all her points, I will do so later.

There will be a right of appeal against the recognition of an overseas disqualification in the UK. Grounds will include the driver not having an adequate opportunity to defend himself or herself abroad or the fact that the offence was not covered by the European convention on human rights. Drivers will have 21 days within which to appeal and the court may, where it sees fit, suspend the disqualification pending the outcome of the appeal. We believe that that provides crucial safeguards. UK drivers must abide by the laws of the member state in which they are driving. If a person breaks a member state's drink-driving law, for example, we believe that they should not escape the consequences when they return home.

Pauline McNeill: It is important to have clarification on how that will operate in practice. If other countries have different grounds for disqualification in drink-driving cases, it is important to know whether the driving ban will be active in Scotland. I realise that it might not be possible for the minister to confirm that today.

Hugh Henry: The point that we are making is that the rules that led to disqualification in the other country will lead to disqualification in this country. In the case of drink driving, the other country might apply a higher or lower level to a ban on driving, but whatever the application is in the other country, it will lead to a ban in Scotland irrespective of the fact that our levels are different. I can talk to Pauline McNeill later about the other issues she might want to raise.

Time and again, we hear the point that was made about Council of Ministers meetings. The arguments are always the same, so the replies are essentially always the same.

Brian Fitzpatrick (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab): Will the minister confirm whether the officials who are sitting at the back of the chamber have access to e-mails, telephones and fax machines? Will he also confirm that they have the benefit of the documents that are circulated around the devolved Administrations under the various concordats that were agreed with Her Majesty's Government, including those on justice and home affairs? It is not as if the United Kingdom did not take part in meetings on the Laeken summit and the Treaty of Nice. The UK led those discussions in the EU, and was ably represented by a number of prominent Scottish members of the UK cabinet.

Hugh Henry: Brian Fitzpatrick makes his point very well. Our officials are in regular contact with UK Government officials, and we have the opportunity to influence what they take to meetings and to receive the information that they obtain at them. At a political level, we have time and again documented and detailed our influence on European policy and legislation through our participation in the UK. As we have said, being part of a major European nation that is a major player in Europe gives us influence way beyond any influence that we would have if we were simply a member country of 5 million people. Scottish ministers attend EU councils and regularly discuss EU policy on EU matters with UK counterparts. It is not correct to say that we have no influence on EU law.

Phil Gallie mentioned prior consultation on the bill. I should point out that, as soon as a UK bill is published, we publish a detailed memorandum that sets out any devolved elements. However, we will certainly consider any measures that we can take to improve such consultation.

Peers have raised several substantive issues about cross-border surveillance, which the UK Government will consider further at committee stage in the House of Lords in January. There was a second reading of the bill in the House of Lords on 2 December.

As for the operation of the Schengen information system in Scotland, the system's Scottish base is the National Criminal Intelligence Service in Paisley. The NCIS controls access to information, and the information commissioner will be able to inspect data security at any point and without notice.

On the question about requests for assistance under clause 7, the Lord Advocate might need to make any such requests at the investigative stage—in other words, before proceedings come to court. Finally, on Michael Matheson's question on the admissibility of evidence under clause 6 and whether we can be sure that such evidence is obtained fairly, the courts will ultimately adjudicate on the admissibility of evidence in all cases.

The bill is an important piece of legislation that will bring major benefits to our partners in Europe and—significantly—to us. Not only will it enable us to deal with some small anomalies such as driving disqualifications, but it will mean that we will be able to work together to tackle some of the worst aspects of international crime.

I invite Parliament to support the motion.

The Presiding Officer: The decision on that motion will be taken at 5 o'clock.

Business Motion

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): The next item of business is consideration of business motion S1M-3675, in the name of Patricia Ferguson on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out the business programme that is printed in the business bulletin.

I call Euan Robson to move and—if he wishes—to speak to the motion.

12:24

The Deputy Minister for Parliamentary Business (Euan Robson): I will make a short speech. I am pleased to be able to inform the chamber that the SNP has indicated that the topic for debate on the morning of Thursday 12 December will be children and young people's services in Scotland.

I move,

That the Parliament agrees—

(a) the following programme of business—

Wednesday 11 December 2002

2:30 pm Time for Reflection

followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions

followed by Stage 1 Debate on Mental Health (Scotland) Bill

followed by Financial Resolution in respect of the Mental Health (Scotland) Bill

followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions

5:00 pm Decision Time

followed by Members' Business—debate on the subject of S1M-3589 Karen Gillon: The Sale of The Herald, Sunday Herald and Evening Times by SMG

Thursday 12 December 2002

9:30 am Scottish National Party Business

followed by Business Motion

2:30 pm Question Time

3:10 pm First Minister's Question Time

3:30 pm Executive Debate on Fisheries 2003

followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions

5:00 pm Decision Time

followed by Members' Business—debate on the subject of S1M-3464 Donald Gorrie: Debt and Lending

Wednesday 18 December 2002

2:30 pm Time for Reflection

followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions

followed by Stage 1 Debate on Homelessness (Scotland) Bill

followed by Financial Resolution in respect of Homelessness (Scotland) Bill

followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions

5:00 pm Decision Time

followed by Members' Business

Thursday 19 December 2002

9:30 am Finance Committee Debate on its 7th Report on Stage 2 of the 2003/2004 Budget Process

followed by Business Motion

2:30 pm Question Time

3:10 pm First Minister's Question Time

3:30 pm Stage 1 Debate on Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Bill

followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions

5:00 pm Decision Time

followed by Members' Business

(b) that Stage 1 of the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Bill be completed by 27 February 2003

and (c) that the Justice 1 Committee reports to the Justice 2 Committee by 17 December 2002 on the Act of Sederunt (Fees of Sheriff Officers) 2002 and on the draft Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (Cash Searches: Constables in Scotland: Code of Practice) Order 2002.

Motion agreed to.

12:24

Meeting suspended until 14:30.

14:30

On resuming—

Question Time

SCOTTISH EXECUTIVE

Ritalin

1. Mary Scanlon (Highlands and Islands) (Con): To ask the Scottish Executive how many children under the age of six have been prescribed the drug Ritalin. (S1O-6033)

The Minister for Health and Community Care (Malcolm Chisholm): Prescription data collected centrally are not patient-specific. Ritalin is not licensed for children under six years of age. A medicine can be used outside its licence, but that would be a clinical decision for the doctor concerned.

Mary Scanlon: Is the minister concerned about the increasing number of children, including very young children, who are being prescribed Ritalin? Does he have concerns about the long-term effects on those children as they reach adulthood?

Malcolm Chisholm: I have had concerns about the matter over a period of time. Constituents, including one who contacted me this morning, have expressed concerns about the prescription of Ritalin, particularly its prescription for children under the age of six.

Having said that, in my current position I have to listen to clinical advice. A Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network guideline that came out last year makes it clear that drugs such as Ritalin have a role to play. However, the guideline also states that they should be part of a multidisciplinary approach and that non-pharmacological treatments—including behaviour management—are equally, if not more, important.

Mr Adam Ingram (South of Scotland) (SNP): Why has the Executive not allocated resources to ensure the implementation of the SIGN guideline 52? As the minister says, it advocates the use of psychosocial therapies to reduce dependence on drugs such as Ritalin.

Malcolm Chisholm: In general terms, resources have been allocated, although they are not allocated specifically on the basis of each SIGN guideline that is produced. It should certainly be possible to implement the guideline—which is obviously the guideline to which clinicians should look for advice—within the overall increases in health and local authority budgets.


European Funding (Highlands and Islands)

2. Mr Jamie Stone (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD): To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will make representations to the European Commission regarding the loss of objective 1 status for the Highlands and Islands as a result of any miscalculation of figures by the Office for National Statistics. (S1O-6037)

The Deputy Minister for Finance and Public Services (Peter Peacock): As always, we will fight to secure the best possible deal for the Highlands and Islands. The deal struck by Tony Blair in Berlin in 1999 means that the Highlands and Islands receives regional aid that is comparable with the funds received by an objective 1 area. We will use the most up-to-date statistics that are available to us in any negotiations on future aid.

Mr Stone: I am grateful to the minister for his reply and for the assurance that the Executive will argue for the best deal for the Highlands and Islands. He will have my full support in doing so.

The minister will be aware of the significant benefits that European funding has brought to my constituency over the years. Can he tell the chamber what efforts have been made to prepare the ground for the debate in the future? Will he meet representatives of Highlands and Islands Enterprise and the Highland Council to hear their views on the need for continuing regional aid for the Highlands and the best methods of achieving that assistance?

Peter Peacock: As Jamie Stone rightly says, European aid has brought enormous benefits to the Highlands and Islands, not least to his constituency where, for example, the Scrabster harbour project is improving the infrastructure of the area.

We have had a lot of discussions with our UK colleagues about the future. I attended the cohesion forum in Brussels to discuss the second cohesion report and to set out the Scottish position. I also attended the recent Euromontana conference in Inverness on the matter. On three occasions, I have met Commissioner Barnier, who spent some time in the Highlands and Islands earlier in the year talking about these issues. We also recently held a meeting of the structural funds forum in Scotland, which brings together all the key players to consider the future of structural funds. The forum includes the chairman of HIE and the leader of Highland Council. We will continue those discussions and preparations.

Mr Duncan Hamilton (Highlands and Islands) (SNP): In recent days, the minister has made great play of a letter that he has received from the European Commission that rules out any appeal against the loss of European cash for the Highlands and Islands. Will he publish that letter? Does it explicitly and incontrovertibly rule out the possibility of reclassification of the current funding package to objective 1? Does he recognise that securing such an outcome would ensure that vital regional aid continues beyond 2006 in the Highlands and Islands?

Peter Peacock: The question demonstrates a lack of understanding of the issues by the Scottish National Party.

Stewart Stevenson (Banff and Buchan) (SNP): By you.

Peter Peacock: Not by me—by SNP members. The Commission has confirmed that past negotiations cannot be reopened. However, that is not relevant because the future negotiations are what is important. I have always made it clear that we will use the most up-to-date statistics in future negotiations, at which we will argue hard for the Highlands and Islands and for Scotland.

Mr Jamie McGrigor (Highlands and Islands) (Con): If a mistake has been made and an enormous amount of money has been lost for the Highlands and Islands, does the minister intend to get the money back and, if so, how?

Peter Peacock: Mr McGrigor's question is based on another misunderstanding and implies that the Highlands and Islands has somehow lost out, which is not the case. In Berlin in 1999, Tony Blair negotiated a special deal for the Highlands and Islands, which will bring more than €300 million to the area over a six-year period. That deal is comparable to what would have happened if the area had retained objective 1 status and is the reason why progress has been made on many infrastructure programmes throughout the Highlands and Islands. As I have said, the Executive will continue to argue hard on that issue.

Community Care Services

3. Elaine Thomson (Aberdeen North) (Lab): To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made on developing a joint-future approach to the delivery of community care services. (S1O-6050)

The Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care (Mr Frank McAveety): We are already making good progress on shifting the balance of care for older people using the new funding, which will rise to £48 million next year, to develop more intensive and flexible home care services. By April 2003, we will implement key areas such as joint resourcing and joint management for older people and single shared assessment for all care groups.

Elaine Thomson: Is the minister aware of the recent newspaper article that misrepresented a joint community care project to provide non-hospital care for older people in Smithfield Court in Aberdeen? Will the minister reassure the families and the older people involved that the community care that is provided is of a high standard? Will he join me in condemning the ill-informed comments made by some Opposition MSPs?

Mr McAveety: I thank Elaine Thomson for her question. The project she mentions is a joint project agreed between Aberdeen City Council and the local health board. It is part of the strategic response to delayed discharge, which aims to find more effective local ways of helping people who are taken out of hospital. I am not surprised by the sensationalist press coverage, but to describe the project—as the Opposition spokesperson on health has done—as a makeshift hospital that is not the answer and which will not provide the care the patients need is to ignore the key role of the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care in assessing the quality of care. The project will complement existing provision of sheltered housing for older people and is part of a package that aims to provide the most appropriate care in the localities where people want it.

Shona Robison (North-East Scotland) (SNP): Does the minister agree that the joint-future approach between local authorities and health boards is completely missing from the Mental Health (Scotland) Bill, which is being considered by the Health and Community Care Committee? Will the Executive address that omission?

Mr McAveety: We are absolutely committed to working in partnership on community care. In fact, the Health and Community Care Committee has examined many of those issues. The Executive is confident that we will develop a partnership approach that recognises the issue of mental health.

The original question was about the appropriateness of care provision. I assure members—although Opposition members do not want to hear this—that the project that Elaine Thomson mentioned is a model that will deliver for older people in the Aberdeen area and that will provide the support they require in their community. It is not only in relation to that project that we need to be sensitive about the language we use; language on care issues throughout Scotland should be sensitive as we try to deliver the best quality care for the older people of Scotland.

NHS 24

4. Karen Whitefield (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab): To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made on the roll-out of NHS 24. (S1O-6026)

The Minister for Health and Community Care (Malcolm Chisholm): NHS 24 was launched in Grampian in May 2002 and in greater Glasgow in November. It now provides a 24-hour service to some 1.6 million people. The phased roll-out programme aims to provide Scotland-wide coverage by December 2004.

Karen Whitefield: I welcome the move to roll out the service and I inform the minister of the support for the service that I have encountered in my constituency. When does he expect the service to be rolled out in Lanarkshire? Will he comment on the fact that the staff who provide the service are invaluable members of the national health service family?

Malcolm Chisholm: I pay tribute to the staff who work for NHS 24, whom I was pleased to meet in both Aberdeen and Glasgow. I am sure that all members were as appalled as I was by the senior doctor who described them as monkeys. I am sure that we all condemn that unreservedly.

On the first point that Margaret Jamieson made—

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): It was Karen Whitefield.

Malcolm Chisholm: I apologise. I am utterly confident that NHS 24 provides a good service because I have spoken to people in Aberdeen and Glasgow who have used it and who have benefited from an integrated service. In the past 24 hours, I have spoken to someone who phoned NHS 24 in Glasgow. The information from that call went straight through to the accident and emergency department that she then attended. Patients will benefit increasingly from integrated and seamless services.

Maureen Macmillan (Highlands and Islands) (Lab): Does the minister realise that the advent of NHS 24 is eagerly awaited by rural communities in the Highlands, where primary care services are under great pressure? Can he assure me that NHS 24 will be able to deliver an improvement to the health service in rural areas? When can we expect it to be rolled out to the Highlands and Islands?

Malcolm Chisholm: As I said in my first answer, NHS 24 will be rolled out across Scotland by the end of 2004. It will be rolled out early in the Highland region, given that it started in the north of Scotland. Over and above the general benefits that will apply throughout Scotland, NHS 24 will have particular advantages for rural areas. For example, general practitioners in rural areas will benefit, in terms of their being on call.

The Presiding Officer: Question 5 has been withdrawn.

European Funding (Highlands and Islands)

6. Fergus Ewing (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP): To ask the Scottish Executive what its estimate is of how much the Highlands and Islands will receive in regional aid from the European Union from 2006 to 2010. (S1O-6018)

The Deputy Minister for Finance and Public Services (Peter Peacock): It is premature to place any limitation on our ambitions for regional aid post-2006 within the context of a significantly enlarged EU.

Fergus Ewing: I would have thanked the minister if he had answered the question. First, will he admit that the Highlands and Islands should now have objective 1 status? Secondly, will he admit that we do not have objective 1 status because the UK Office for National Statistics bungled the job and the figures? Thirdly, does he agree that, if we had objective 1 status, we would automatically qualify for transitional relief after 2006? Fourthly, does he accept that the cost of that failure by the UK Government and its agencies could be up to £200 million for the Highlands? Finally, will he publish or keep secret the letter from the Commission, to which he referred earlier?

Peter Peacock: Fergus Ewing is not right about many things, and he is wrong again on this occasion, on all fronts. There is no automatic qualification—[Interruption.]

Fergus Ewing: Will the minister publish the letter?

The Presiding Officer: Order. Let us have no commentary during the answer, please.

Peter Peacock: There is no automatic entitlement to transitional aid. The Executive continues to fight hard for the Highlands and Islands, as it always has. I have already referred to the fact that the Highlands and Islands have not lost out in any respect, as they have received special transitional aid from Europe equivalent to what would have been received under objective 1 status.

Fergus Ewing displays a misunderstanding of the situation that reveals the difference between the coalition parties and the SNP. We are certain about what we are seeking to do and we are using the facts, whereas SNP members like to use incomplete statistics. We have a proven track record, in contrast to the risk and uncertainty that is offered by the SNP as it seeks to take us out of the UK, threatening our future in Europe and our share of the rebate. That is why the Scots people do not trust the SNP.

Dr Winnie Ewing (Highlands and Islands) (SNP): Could we please clear up a mis-statement of fact that keeps being made by members of the Labour Government? They say that a special deal was made when we lost objective 1 status; that lie is not only told, but is repeated and repeated. Areas that had objective 1 status would have qualified automatically for transitional money.

I remind the minister that when the Highlands and Islands were alone in Europe in having bordering on 70 per cent of the average gross domestic product per head—we had no competitors at that—Scottish Office officials wanted to fight to get objective 1 status for the Highlands, because we were so near the threshold. However, we did not fight then. Is there going to be no fight again by the Labour Government?

Peter Peacock: Those are extraordinary assertions when it is known full well—I repeat—that there is no automatic entitlement to anything else at the end of an aid period. The transitional aid was achieved by negotiations that were partly conducted by Scottish interests through the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and others, such as the former Scottish Office. As I indicated, the Highlands and Islands benefit enormously from European aid. We will continue to fight our corner in the future, using the most up-to-date statistics to do so.

Transport Infrastructure (Ayrshire)

7. Irene Oldfather (Cunninghame South) (Lab): To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made on improving transport infrastructure in Ayrshire. (S1O-6016)

The Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning (Iain Gray): Scottish Executive investments are improving roads, railways and buses in Ayrshire.

Irene Oldfather: I thank the minister for his answer. Does he agree that best use can be made of the proposed three towns bypass by ensuring that it is adequately linked to an upgraded A737, so that we can properly connect north Ayrshire to Glasgow and the east?

Iain Gray: I am happy to agree that the three towns bypass will be an important element of the improvement of the transport infrastructure in Ayrshire. Invitations to tender for that project went out last month. Irene Oldfather will know that improvements are also taking place on the A737 at the Roadhead roundabout and the Head Street junction. I am aware of proposals and suggestions that further improvements could take place at Dalry, for example. However, such decisions will be made as part of future major investment programmes.

Phil Gallie (South of Scotland) (Con): Is the minister aware that last week his deputy ruled out any chance of a toll bypass around Maybole? Can he say what plans the Executive inherited for a Maybole bypass? Can he say whether a route has been defined for that bypass and, if so, whether that route has been protected? Does he agree that the A77 southern link between Ayr and Stranraer is an important artery for Ayrshire's infrastructure? What does he intend to do about the problems in Maybole?

Iain Gray: I am happy to agree that the link to Stranraer is important for Scotland and for Galloway in particular. We continue to work closely with the partnership there. Lewis Macdonald has been involved in recent weeks with that partnership, looking at the A75 and A77 links to Stranraer. On the detail of the legal position on a potential route for a Maybole bypass, I am loth to make anything of legal positions when I reply to a question in the chamber, but I am willing to find out the detailed answer to Mr Gallie's question and reply to him in writing.

Alasdair Morgan (Galloway and Upper Nithsdale) (SNP): I thank the minister for acknowledging the importance of the A77 south of Ayr, not just to Ayrshire, but to Dumfries and Galloway. That was also acknowledged by the fact that the recent meeting of the north channel partnership—the organisation that represents ferry interests—was hosted by South Ayrshire Council in Ayr. Can we expect further announcements—indeed, any announcements—about improvements to the A77 in the near future?

Iain Gray: The most significant improvement to the A77 is, of course, the M74 extension. We made announcements on that issue only in the past few days, when the preferred bidder was announced. I appreciate that the question was about further south on the A77 but, as a regular user of the road, I must say that both parts of it are important in relation to how long it takes to reach Stranraer.

As the member knows, the north channel partnership discussions are looking at several proposed schemes for the A77 and A75, which are geared particularly towards making the transit from ferries easier. I would expect to be able to make announcements in the relatively near future about the outcome of those negotiations.

Haddock Fishing

8. Mr Andrew Welsh (Angus) (SNP): To ask the Scottish Executive what measures are being taken to protect the haddock fishing and Arbroath smokie industries. (S1O-6041)

The Minister for Environment and Rural Development (Ross Finnie): As the member will be aware, in a general sense the Scottish Executive is committed to avoiding the closure of our mixed fishery, which particularly affects our valuable haddock fishery as well as our whiting and cod fisheries. We are negotiating for a solution that respects the science but affords a sustainable future for the catching and processing sectors. We support in particular the Arbroath smokie industry with financial assistance from the European Union structural fund allocation.

Mr Welsh: Nice answer, but I will check against delivery.

Is the minister listening to today's massive demonstration by fishing communities from throughout Scotland and representatives of all political parties, which demands a secure future for Scotland's fishing industry? Is not the plain truth that, while Scotland's fishermen take the pain of cuts, closures and fishing bans, any benefit that might be gained is being undermined by European factory fishing, which uses tiny-meshed nets, a sample of which I have with me, to fish for sand eels, thereby also undermining the sand banks? Given the simple equation that no food plus no fish equals no fishing industry, what is the minister doing to stop such industrial fishing? What is he delivering for Scotland's fishermen? We do not want words from the minister; we want action.

Ross Finnie: The negotiations that will finally determine the matter will take place later in December. It will be important for us to have words of substance to negotiate with at that table before we come to a result.

On industrial fishing, we have in recent weeks made our position absolutely clear to the European Commission: if we are to have an equitable solution to the difficulties that are affecting all of the species, there must be equity in terms of mesh sizes—

Mr Welsh: The mesh size of the nets that are used is tiny.

Ross Finnie: I understand the member's point, but that is the position. The member asked what my position was. My position, and that of the Scottish Executive, is clear: we do not accept the continued use of nets with such a small mesh size, whether by the Dutch or the Danish, for industrial fishing. We will continue to put that case. It is not equitable for those fisheries to catch the amount of cod that they do as a bycatch when we are required to use much larger mesh sizes in the North sea. We will continue to articulate that case in the negotiations.

Alex Johnstone (North-East Scotland) (Con): Is there any attempt to reassess the economic impact of fishing on the regions in Scotland? I notice, from the papers that were being handed out at today's demonstration, that the figures that are being given exclude Arbroath entirely, on first investigation.

Has the minister taken any steps to ensure that his political masters are present in the fishing communities? Will he take the First Minister and others to places such as Arbroath, which David McLetchie and Iain Duncan Smith will visit tomorrow?

Ross Finnie: I have no doubt that those communities will find that visit uplifting. However, given that—unless I have my geography wrong—both my Scottish leader and my federal leader represent fishing constituencies, I am not entirely sure that they need me to take them on visits. Perhaps Alex Johnstone's leaders need to be taken on visits so they can have explained to them what the fishing industry is and where Scotland is, but mine do not.

On the impact on communities of the current proposals, I assure the member and the communities that we are working hard on economic modelling—in close collaboration with my colleague Iain Gray—to assess that impact to ensure that we have a clear view of the possibilities. We are acutely aware of the fact that the potential impact must be taken seriously.

Richard Lochhead (North-East Scotland) (SNP): Does the minister appreciate that industrial fishing and its impact on white fish stocks is one of the biggest concerns of Scotland's fishing communities? Can he explain why, in a written answer this week, he said that he has made no attempt to consider the impact of industrial fishing on white fish stocks, despite the fact that he has more than 250 scientists in his employ? Does he agree that that is shameful? Should not he be trying to find evidence to take to Europe to help him fight Scotland's corner?

Ross Finnie: We have access to the scientific information that is produced throughout the European Community. The issue is not only about our opposition to the member states that practise industrial fishing. In my response to Andrew Welsh, I made it absolutely clear that we do not need much more scientific advice to make it obvious that nets of the mesh size that he held up have a deleterious impact on the fishery.

However, Richard Lochhead should also be aware that, when we talk about industrial fishing, we must be clear and explicit about what we are trying to achieve, because we also need some of the nations that have industrial fisheries to support us in what we are trying to do in relation to the cod fishery. It is not a simple argument.

Mr Welsh: What about the nets?

Ross Finnie: We know about the nets. The matter is not just about the industrial fishery. Having examined the issue closely, Andrew Welsh will also be aware that the flat fishery is also causing us real problems in relation to its cod bycatch. All that information is out in the open. I make it abundantly clear to the Parliament that that is part of the argument that we are articulating as hard as we possibly can to ensure that we protect Scottish interests in terms of the cod, haddock and whiting fisheries.

Public-private Partnerships (Hospitals)

9. Ms Margo MacDonald (Lothians) (SNP): To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has held any discussions with, or issued any guidelines to, national health service trusts regarding the inclusion in public-private partnership agreements of hospital ancillary facilities such as parking, television and telephones. (S1O-6013)

The Minister for Health and Community Care (Malcolm Chisholm): No guidance has been issued to or discussions held with NHS trusts regarding car parking, television or telephone charges for PPP facilities. There is general guidance in relation to car parking charges, which is currently being revised.

Ms MacDonald: I genuinely thank the minister for that reply because, when I raised the matter with him in September, there were no plans to revise the guidance. Does he think that the Lothian University Hospitals NHS Trust has breached the general guidelines that have been issued in regard to what it charges patients for car parking? It charges £10 per day, compared to the daily rate of £1 at Perth royal infirmary. I assure the minister that I am not being selective in my comparisons; I have investigated all the health boards in Scotland. The minister will find, once he gets into the subject, that the television payment rate of £3.50 per day at Dumfries royal infirmary compares to £1.50 per hour at the Royal infirmary of Edinburgh. Will he comment?

Malcolm Chisholm: Car parking charges at the Royal infirmary of Edinburgh have, in my experience as a constituency MSP in Edinburgh, been the most—indeed, so far, the only—controversial element of the new hospital that has been drawn to my attention. We need to look carefully at the new guidance on car parking charges. The existing guidance says that the charges should not be excessive, but I accept that there is an element of subjectivity in that. I think that charges were relatively expensive even at the old Royal infirmary of Edinburgh, so the increase is not all that great in Edinburgh terms. However, that does not altogether remove concerns about the charges.

Television is nothing to do with the PPP contract—it is not part of the contract. I think that Ms Macdonald will find that the rate that she quoted for Dumfries is more or less the same as the rate for Edinburgh, because, after the first two hours, there is no charge at all.

Helen Eadie (Dunfermline East) (Lab): In view of the current World Trade Organisation negotiations on the general agreement on trade in services, does the Executive have a view on how GATS will affect future policy on involvement of the private sector in our public services? Will the Executive reassure the Parliament that all efforts are being made to represent Scotland's interests to United Kingdom and European Union negotiators?

Malcolm Chisholm: I cannot talk across all the ministers' portfolios, but GATS will have no significant implications for health.

Livestock Auction Markets

10. Alex Fergusson (South of Scotland) (Con): To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has for the future operation of livestock auction markets in the light of last year's outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease. (S1O-6021)

The Minister for Environment and Rural Development (Ross Finnie): Everyone is pleased that livestock markets are back in business following the foot-and-mouth outbreak. In the aftermath of that outbreak, I expect livestock markets to comply with all existing legislation, including the current biosecurity provisions.

Alex Fergusson: I endorse the minister's remarks. Does he agree that the livestock auction markets have a vital future role to play in ensuring that livestock changes hands in the safe, biosecure environment that they can provide? Does he also agree that, by setting a base price for most other forms of stock purchase, they form an irreplaceable part of Scotland's food price chain? Will he give his robust backing to the continuing operations of livestock marketing companies? They are still struggling to recover from last year's disease outbreak, which they were highly influential in helping to stamp out.

Ross Finnie: I have no difficulty in assuring the member that the Executive has absolutely no plans to interfere with the provision of livestock auction marts. We must understand that there are direct purchasers who would offer particular deals, and I do not think that there is anything that I can do about that. We have to be concerned that, under such deals, transactions are carried out in a way that does not breach biosecurity arrangements. I agree fully with the member on the general principle of the continuing need for livestock markets.

Sex Offenders

11. Dorothy-Grace Elder (Glasgow) (Ind): To ask the Scottish Executive how many convicted sex offenders are receiving treatment and how many such offenders who have been released have had treatment. (S1O-6066)

The Deputy First Minister and Minister for Justice (Mr Jim Wallace): That information is not available in the form that the member requested. In June 2002, 466 known sex offenders were serving terms of imprisonment. There are 42 places currently available on accredited programmes for the treatment of sex offenders and in May 2002, 179 prisoners were liberated after participating in prison-based treatment for sexual offenders.

Dorothy-Grace Elder: I understand from the minister's reply that only 42 of the 466 sex offenders are currently receiving any treatment to stop them reoffending against children and women. It has been revealed that less than one third of prisoners at HMP Peterhead are given treatment before release. Does not that make a mockery of child protection?

Today's Scottish Daily Express contains claims that prisoners at Peterhead are planning to open a toy shop after their release, that one particularly dangerous paedophile, Francis Currens, made a video of pregnant women and of children while he was in Peterhead, and that those men are in contact with other perverts in the outside world. Will the minister please look into what on earth is happening in our prisons?

Mr Wallace: I will put Dorothy-Grace Elder's point into some kind of perspective. She will appreciate that if one is serving a very long-term sentence, the programmes that one can receive are not continuous. The STOP 2000 programme, for example, runs for a specific period and is not repeated. Therefore, we would not expect all prisoners to be undergoing treatment continually.

The Spencer report, which was published in September this year, highlighted the insufficient number of sexual offender treatment places; indeed, it called for a fourfold increase in places. The Scottish Prison Service is gearing itself up to deliver a greater number of programme places, but that takes time and involves proper training for what is very sensitive work.

The Scottish Prison Service is also developing a rolling programme for prisoners who are serving shorter sentences. Much of the effort has, so far, been concentrated on prisoners who are serving longer sentences but, as members will agree, shorter-term prisoners also need programmes. Work on providing such programmes is being done.

Lord James Douglas-Hamilton (Lothians) (Con): Can the Minister for Justice provide an assessment of how many of those who received treatment prior to being released have reoffended? What actions is the Executive taking to address that reoffending?

Mr Wallace: Lord James will recall that, during some of the Justice 1 Committee's discussions on the prison estate review, various figures on the level of reoffending were posited. From memory, I do not think that there was agreement as to how reliable those figures are. It is important, however, that we obtain that information.

Lord James will also be aware of the work that the Justice 2 Committee is doing in its stage 2 consideration of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill, part 1 of which relates to the new orders for lifelong restriction, which will be directed in particular towards serious violent and sexual offenders. I think that we are taking a significant step forward on how we, as a community, deal with prisoners in those categories.

Dental Services (Borders)

12. Christine Grahame (South of Scotland) (SNP): To ask the Scottish Executive what concerns it has in respect of the delivery of general dental services in the Scottish Borders. (S1O-6029)

The Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care (Mrs Mary Mulligan): We are aware that there is evidence that access to national health service dental services in the Borders is becoming more difficult. That is why the Borders is one of the designated areas for the £1 million package that we introduced in August as part of a phased programme to improve recruitment and retention of dentists in Scotland. Although elements of the package cover all areas of Scotland, there are enhanced incentives for designated areas.

Christine Grahame: I refer the minister to a report of 24 September to the Borders NHS Board executive team. The report, which postdates the allocation of the money to which the minister referred, makes it clear that it is becoming more difficult to access general dental services in the Borders. I refer the minister to the case of a woman in Kelso, who after scouring the Borders for NHS treatment was forced to go to England as a private patient, because no care was available in the Borders. If the minister agrees that that is a disgrace, what does she intend to do about it?

Mrs Mulligan: We are aware that there are a number of pressure points in dental services throughout Scotland. That is why we have instituted the designated areas scheme. The £1 million package will include payments of £3,000 to each new dental graduate, £5,000 to all new dentists and up to £10,000 to dentists who take on trainees. One cannot say that the Executive is not doing anything about the problem.

I am aware of the report to which Christine Grahame referred. Borders NHS Board is considering that report and how to address the issues that it raises. We will support Borders NHS Board and continue to examine ways to bring dentists to areas where they are needed. I have answered a number of questions on the issue in the chamber and have said continually that we will examine new ways of bringing dentists to areas of need. However, members from the SNP have failed to come up with one suggestion for addressing the problem.

Recycling

13. Nora Radcliffe (Gordon) (LD): To ask the Scottish Executive how it plans to meet its stated recycling targets. (S1O-6062)

The Minister for Environment and Rural Development (Ross Finnie): The target to recycle and compost 25 per cent of municipal waste by 2006 will be met by local authorities implementing the national waste strategy.

The Executive has allocated £230 million over the next three years to the strategic waste fund to assist local authorities in the implementation of the area waste plans. Yesterday I announced that £6 million of this year's allocation to the strategic waste fund is to be distributed between local authorities now, to help them to expand recycling and composting.

Nora Radcliffe: I am sure that the minister agrees that sustained, concerted effort across agencies will be needed to persuade people to be more waste aware and to change their behaviour. Does he agree that the report on the Waste Aware Scotland survey, "Public attitudes to Reduce, Reuse, Recycle in Scotland" is encouraging and offers good pointers to what is likely to be effective? Based on that survey, will the minister do what he can to facilitate and encourage the introduction of kerbside collections where population density makes them a sensible option?

Ross Finnie: Yes. The survey indicated that 83 per cent of people would be more willing to participate in recycling if kerbside collection were available. In the area waste plans and their contributions to the national waste strategy, local authorities are required to indicate how they intend to increase public willingness to participate in, and public awareness of, recycling. Included in the strategy are measures such as kerbside collection. Local authorities will be able to apply to the Scottish Executive for money from the strategic waste fund to finance kerbside collection.

Robin Harper (Lothians) (Green): If my memory serves me correctly, two years ago £50 million was allocated to waste management, to be bid for by councils. Has all that money been bid for? What percentage of it went to fund recycling, rather than to deal with general waste management problems?

Ross Finnie: I do not have the details that Robin Harper seeks. I will be happy to provide him with a breakdown of the figures in writing.

Bruce Crawford (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP): Will the minister help me to solve a little mystery? Will the minister confirm—[[Interruption.] I know that the minister cannot hear me, so I will wait until the rabble clam up. Will the minister confirm that on 20 February he said:

"The National Waste Plan based on the area waste plans will be in place by Autumn this year. We then want to set mandatory recycling and waste reduction targets and the forthcoming Local Government Bill will give Ministers the power to set such targets."

What happened to that ministerial promise?

Ross Finnie: The ministerial promise remains. The difficulty has been in finalising—[Interruption.] There are different ways of approaching the matter. We have tried to proceed through co-operation and collaboration with local authorities. That is the way in which Labour and Liberal Democrat members prefer to proceed. We have built that plan from the bottom up and that is why it has taken a little longer to get the area waste plans.

The second part of the question was on setting targets. We have taken the view that, as the interim area waste plans have indicated, it is possible to reach the target of 25 per cent waste recycling. Although we have not finalised the national waste strategy, it begins to look as if we could achieve a figure of something of the order of 40 per cent waste recycling. If that is the case and if the plan confirms that, that is the target that we will include in the local government bill when we introduce it. That is the answer to the member's question. If he disagrees with a bottom-up approach, I ask him to give us his alternative.

Elaine Smith (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab): Have steps been taken to encourage businesses, particularly those that operate premises in which considerable recyclable waste is generated, such as business centres and serviced office accommodation, to employ the recycling services that many waste management providers are making available?

Ross Finnie: Yes. We have a group of people who are trying to deal much more generally with the various elements of the national waste strategy. In particular, we are giving local authorities every encouragement to do exactly what the member suggested.

First Minister's Question Time

15:11

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): The next item of business is First Minister's question time.

Mr Duncan McNeil (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab): On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I draw to your attention the edition of The Scotsman from Monday 2 December, in which Mike Russell stated that he would use First Minister's question time today to demand assurances from the Executive on theatre funding. [Interruption.] I am trying to make a serious point.

The Presiding Officer: Order. Let me hear the point of order.

Mr McNeil: Unless Mr Russell is now operating under the title, "Mystic Mike", how would he know that his question would be selected for today? Will the Presiding Officer give us an assurance about the criteria for the selection of questions and will he assure us that there was no prior agreement to select Mike Russell's question for the First Minister today?

The Presiding Officer: In the first place, I did not see that report on Monday morning. If I had seen it, it might have tempted me not to select the question. I do not know when the question was lodged, but questions are not selected until Monday afternoon and The Scotsman goes to bed on Sunday night, so perhaps Mike Russell is Mystic Meg.

Secretary of State for Scotland (Meetings)

1. Mr John Swinney (North Tayside) (SNP): To ask the First Minister when he next plans to meet the Secretary of State for Scotland and what issues he intends to discuss. (S1F-2313)

The First Minister (Mr Jack McConnell): I met the Secretary of State last week and I will see her again tomorrow when I will take the opportunity to discuss with her the meeting that she and Ross Finnie have had this week with Scottish fishing organisations. Today, we welcome to our Parliament campaigners from the fishing communities in Scotland. I assure them of our support to secure both a sustainable stock in the North sea and sustainable communities in Scotland's fishing areas.

Mr Swinney: I thank the First Minister for his answer and I welcome his comments.

I wonder whether the First Minister has taken an interest this week in opinion polls. If so, he will have seen a poll showing that 94 per cent of Scots believe that the fishing industry is important to Scotland's future—a conclusion that, I am sure, is shared throughout the chamber. We are told, as the First Minister has just told us, that one part of the Scottish Executive is fighting to save the fishing industry, while another part—the Scottish Prison Service—is trying to recruit fishermen in the north-east of Scotland with the rather crass slogan:

"Not all careers float away with the tide."

Will the First Minister reassure Scotland that that disgraceful propaganda does not represent the view of his Government and that the Executive will pull out all the stops to save Scotland's fishing industry?

The First Minister: There is no doubt in my mind that that was a crass and insensitive advert and an apology could not have been issued too quickly, because it is important to deal with such incidents quickly.

The main issue today is that we in this Parliament are most effective when we are united. In the next fortnight, we need to be united and strong in ensuring that our fisheries minister can go to Brussels, argue on behalf of the fishing communities and deliver a result in what will be very difficult circumstances.

Mr Swinney: In that spirit, I say to the First Minister that he will be aware that a new regime for fishery management will be introduced on 1 January. That regime will give much greater influence to countries with a direct interest in particular fisheries, and in this case the North sea fishery. Does the First Minister agree that it is essential that the European Union negotiations later this month, which will seek to secure a long-term future for the industry, should be carried out under that new regime rather than under an old system that has always failed the Scottish fishing industry?

The First Minister: We must deal with the reality of the situation, which is that the decisions will be made at a meeting that will take place in two weeks' time. For a number of weeks, our job in the Parliament has been to ensure that, if possible, we build a consensus with those in Scotland's fishing industries and within the Parliament for a strategy that has the right solutions and that wins enough support among our European partners to enable the right decision to be secured in December. That will not be an easy task.

Anyone who thinks that, if we simply make demands, all the other European countries will fall into line is wrong. We must ensure that we have the right arguments and that we work well in advance of the European Council to put forward those arguments and win support. If we do that, we can be as successful as we have been in the past.

Mr Swinney: My point concerns the difference between conducting the negotiations on 20 December under an old regime that will come to an end on 31 December and conducting them under a new regime that will come into place on 1 January, which will give much greater decision-making power to those with a direct interest in the North sea fishery. Will the First Minister assure us that he would support a plan that would give much greater significance to a North sea management plan and that he would support the production of such a plan by participant countries at a future European Council in the new year? Will the First Minister instruct his fisheries minister to lodge such a proposal at the meeting in December?

The First Minister: There is a difference here between rhetoric and reality. The meeting in December will make the relevant decisions. We must influence those decisions here and now. We should not pretend that an easy solution can be obtained by postponing until another day.

I see that Mr Welsh is about to say something. He should be cautious for a second. I support regional management of the fisheries and a North sea management plan. A North sea management plan would still involve the Danes, for example, who are involved in the practice of industrial fishing that we want to tackle. The issues remain the same whether we are talking about the whole European Union or a North sea management plan.

We must ensure that the right decisions are taken in December, that we sustain a stock in the North sea and that we sustain our fishing communities. As I have said, we need to be united in that approach. We also need to ensure that we have regional implementation of those fishing plans to secure a better system for the future.

Mr Swinney: All that I am asking the First Minister to do is to give an agreement that he will at least put on the table the proposal that I have made to the Parliament. Will he do that?

The First Minister: We are trying hard, and have been trying hard for weeks, to secure a consensus in the Parliament that backs up the fisheries minister when he represents our country in Brussels and seeks to secure a future for Scotland's fisheries. We have sometimes made such efforts in difficult circumstances and in the face of provocation.

Solutions that attempt to put off decisions until another day will not work at the European Council. We need to win the argument now. We are taking on that argument and working with the fishing organisations and the representatives of fishing communities, some of whom are here again today, to obtain the best solution for Scotland that it is possible to obtain in a majority vote situation in the European Council.

Cabinet (Meetings)

2. David McLetchie (Lothians) (Con): To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S1F-2325)

The First Minister (Mr Jack McConnell): The agenda for next week's Cabinet meeting will be agreed later this week.

I would like to take the opportunity to congratulate Mr McLetchie on the award that he won last week. I look forward to debating with him again in the future.

David McLetchie: Thank you very much.

The First Minister will recall that, at question time five weeks ago, when some people were more concerned about the petty cash in Mr McConnell's local Labour party, I asked him about the crisis that was facing Scotland's fishing industry. That crisis is obviously still facing the industry. With the benefit of five weeks' hindsight, will the First Minister acknowledge that far too many people are responsible for fishing within the EU institutions and within the United Kingdom Government, which appears to have already accepted a case for bans and major quota cuts and which is talking the language of compensation—the language of defeat?

Will the First Minister encourage Mr Finnie and the other members of the UK delegation to the fisheries council to challenge that kind of defeatist mentality and demand measures that will sustain our communities rather than simply manage their decline?

The First Minister: As I said in my previous answers, we need to be serious about this subject in the chamber. It is easy for those who are not required to go to Brussels and make the case to say that we should not make what are sensible proposals. Those proposals will do the two things that are important. First, they will conserve stocks in the North sea, so that our fishing communities have an industry years and years from now. Secondly, they will ensure that we have fishing communities with a strong fishing industry in the meantime. Both those objectives run side by side. Ross Finnie's discussions have been aimed at achieving those objectives. That is why it is important that we enter into positive discussions with our European partners and with others. That is also why we have the full support of the UK Government in doing so.

David McLetchie: I accept what the First Minister says about the need both for a short-term decision to be reached and for the longer-term issues concerning fisheries conservation to be dealt with.

I want to ask about that slightly longer-term agenda. The last time that we discussed the issue at question time—and again today, if I heard him correctly—the First Minister spoke about his support for regional management of our fisheries. Yesterday in the Westminster Parliament, his colleague Anne Begg spoke of the need to reform the common fisheries policy with what she called zonal management. Does the First Minister accept that such semantics perhaps miss the point, which is that what is needed in the longer term is national control of our fisheries? Our fishing communities managed to sustain themselves for hundreds of years without a common fisheries policy but it is apparent that they are now being destroyed by the CFP. Would not it be more appropriate for their destiny to be put back in their own hands, as part of a longer-term reform?

The First Minister: We are not in the business of renegotiating European Union treaties in the next 12 days or, for that matter, of looking to long-term solutions that come from the Conservative party's obsession with breaking up bits of the European Union. The situation is that we have a common fisheries policy, so we need to deal with the here and now by conducting the negotiations in the interests of Scotland.

We said weeks ago that we would secure the agreement of the UK Government—I remember both Opposition parties being sceptical about that—but that is what we now have. Yesterday, the Prime Minister endorsed our strategy and our campaign.

We also said that we would negotiate and deal in bilateral discussions with those other European countries with which it might be possible to secure a common interest. We have done that. Ross Finnie had those meetings and discussions in Brussels last week. We are working hard to ensure that we have more support.

We need a longer-term approach to secure a change in the way in which the European Union conducts its business in fishing and in other areas. We need more regional representation and more rights for regions and for nations to ensure that decisions that are made at a European level are properly implemented locally. Those are our objectives in the shorter and longer terms. I believe that they are right.

Racist Attacks

3. Paul Martin (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab): To ask the First Minister what measures the Scottish Executive will take to deal with any increase in the number of racist attacks. (S1F-2321)

The First Minister (Mr Jack McConnell): I want to make it clear that racist attacks have no place in today's Scotland. We are committed to challenging racism, whatever form it takes and wherever in Scotland it occurs.

Where cases are reported, the Lord Advocate has made clear his commitment to ensure that the police and procurators fiscal improve the prosecution of racist crime.

Paul Martin: Will the First Minister join me in making it clear to the Parliament that asylum seekers will continue to be made welcome in Sighthill? I want to make it clear that those who carry out racist attacks are not welcome in Sighthill. I also want to make a plea to the media, to Government agencies and to all political parties that are represented in the Parliament to recognise the positive work that is being done in Sighthill with asylum seekers. We need to face up to the continuing challenges and ensure that we deal with them.

The First Minister: I endorse what Paul Martin has said. I praise him and all the community organisations in Sighthill for the work that has been undertaken to secure a much better community atmosphere in that area so as to provide a welcoming environment, not only for asylum seekers but for others in Sighthill.

The situation is very clear. If Scotland's economy is to grow, if we are to be proud of our country as we travel throughout the world, and if we are to have a society that we can be proud of in the 21st century, we must deal with racism, sectarianism and the other blights on our society. We have to tackle them head on and make it clear to young people that those things are unacceptable in modern Scotland. We intend to do that. It is one of the reasons why the Parliament was created and I intend to be involved.

National Theatre

4. Michael Russell (South of Scotland) (SNP): To ask the First Minister when the appointment of a chairperson for the board of the national theatre will be announced. (S1F-2315)

The First Minister (Mr Jack McConnell): The Scottish Arts Council will make an appointment from a shortlist of candidates, which has been drawn up on its behalf.

Michael Russell: One would not have to be Mystic Mike to be disappointed with that answer.

The Executive's delay on the matter has landed it with two problems rather than one: under-resourcing in Scottish theatre leading to a drain of talent from Scotland, and endless delays in appointing a director for the national theatre. Would not the First Minister do better by funding Scottish theatre and the national theatre and by taking what the chairman of the Scottish Arts Council has suggested as a new baseline approach to Scottish arts funding so that we can move the arts forward rather than driving them backwards as his Administration has done?

The First Minister: I will say three things as briefly as I can.

First, Mr Russell should recognise that arts funding—I am not talking about local authority funding and all the other sources of funding—through the Scottish Arts Council and the three Scottish national institutions will go through the £100 million barrier next year for the first time.

Secondly, within that overall budget, the funding for drama will go up in 2003 to £7.5 million, which is an increase of £1.1 million or 17.34 per cent.

Thirdly, if Mr Russell knows anything about Scottish arts and culture, he will be aware that Scottish theatre's current problem is with the funding of those regional theatres that are so important because they are a baseline for any future national theatre in Scotland. That is why, in 2002 alone, there has been a 90 per cent increase in funding for the Byre Theatre, a 92 per cent increase for the Dundee Rep Theatre, a 24 per cent increase for the Royal Lyceum Theatre Company, and a 60 per cent increase for the puppet and animation festival. All those are examples of increased funding for the Scottish regional theatres that will provide a basis for a national theatre in the years to come.

Sarah Boyack (Edinburgh Central) (Lab): I welcome the First Minister's statement of commitment to the theatre in Scotland.

Can I make the First Minister aware that many in the theatre community are concerned that the delays to the national theatre are unfortunate? I welcome his commitment to regional theatre, particularly to theatres such as the Royal Lyceum Theatre Company, which have suffered over the years because of local authority funding crises, many of which were due to the abolition of regional councils.

Will the First Minister agree to ask his colleague Mike Watson to meet me to discuss the matter further to see how we can develop some of the excellent producing theatres in Scotland, upon which a future theatre could be built?

The First Minister: I cannot praise enough some of the excellent work that has taken place in Scotland's theatres in recent years and is taking place at the moment. It is important that theatres such as the Lyceum are supported at the right level.

That is precisely why we have had to delay the national theatre project. We have had to ensure that those theatres throughout Scotland are properly funded with the sorts of increases that will secure them as the basis for a proper national theatre in the years to come. I am sure that Mike Watson will be delighted to meet Sarah Boyack to discuss the subject. I reassure the chamber that the Executive's commitment to a national theatre remains firm. However, it will not be formed at the expense of regional theatre; it will build on Scotland's regional theatre.

Creutzfeld-Jakob Disease

5. Dorothy-Grace Elder (Glasgow) (Ind): Now to dying people.

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive has any plans to review the methods of alerting any patients who may have been at risk of exposure to variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. (S1F-2332)

The First Minister (Mr Jack McConnell): The UK CJD incidents panel—the expert committee that was set up to give advice on the management of incidents—advises NHS Scotland on those matters. We have no plans to review those arrangements. However, I make it clear that I expect the panel and patients' clinicians to put the interests of patients and their families first at all times.

Dorothy-Grace Elder: The First Minister will be aware that many people in Scotland received frightening letters last week. Those people are ill, because they were contaminated in the past as a result of the bad-blood scandal in the national health service, whereby skid-row blood was bought in from America and infected babies. How will the First Minister answer Mr Andrew Gunn, who is standing outside this Parliament and protesting in the rain? He is asking for answers and a proper inquiry into the entire bad-blood scandal, including the most recent incident. The Minister for Health and Community Care claims that he was not told about the latest variant CJD risk and, of course, he was not the Minister for Health and Community Care two years ago, but he was at least the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care. Will the First Minister end cover-ups in the NHS? Will he go for a public inquiry?

The First Minister: I have made it clear that I do not want to see any cover-ups in the NHS. I expect the panel of clinicians to which I referred, and the other bodies with similar responsibilities in the health service, to put the interests of patients and their families first at all times.

I wish to put on the record the fact that the Minister for Health and Community Care acted as soon as he knew that the information was available. He did that quickly, which was in the interests of the patients. He was right to do so, and I am sure that he has made it absolutely clear to his department that he needs to be able to do that more quickly in the future.

The Presiding Officer: I will allow injury time for the point of order and take question 6.

Dangerous Cargoes

6. John Farquhar Munro (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD): To ask the First Minister what representations the Scottish Executive has made to Her Majesty's Government regarding the passage of ships with dangerous cargoes past Scotland's coastline. (S1F-2328)

The First Minister (Mr Jack McConnell): We are in regular contact with the UK Government on a wide range of issues, including shipping. We share the same objective of ensuring that the seas around Scotland are safe and that the environment is protected.

John Farquhar Munro: I am sure that the First Minister will be aware that it is estimated that 20 per cent of the crude oil traffic in the United Kingdom goes through the biologically sensitive waters of the Minch. Will the First Minister make representations to the International Maritime Organisation and the Westminster Government to ensure that hazardous and dangerous shipping traffic takes the deep-water route west of the Hebrides?

The First Minister: Ministers will be happy to take up the points that John Farquhar Munro makes, but it is important to state that there are big issues of international maritime law. There are rights of free passage, and we cannot ignore that, but we need to ensure that our waters and our coast are as protected as they possibly can be, while respecting some of those international rights, which are important for Scots, as well as for people elsewhere in the world.

John Scott (Ayr) (Con): Does the First Minister agree, given the details that John Farquhar Munro has just outlined, that the use of pilots should be made mandatory for all ships passing through the Minch? Has he considered using the global positioning system to monitor and aid the passage of supertankers through those particularly dangerous waters?

The First Minister: The UK Government, as I understand it, is currently arguing for such changes in the international maritime regulations. We support it in those endeavours, and we are in regular contact with it.

The Presiding Officer: That ends question time.

Michael Russell (South of Scotland) (SNP): On a point of order, Presiding Officer. In your response to Duncan McNeil's point of order, you may have inadvertently indicated that there was some bar against talking about questions before they were lodged, and that you would be prejudiced against questions that were talked about before they were lodged. Perhaps you could reflect upon that when you see the Official Report. If I am wrong about that, of course I shall apologise.

The Presiding Officer: There is no need for an apology. I made a light-hearted remark. The fact is that there was no communication—as he will confirm—between Mr Russell and myself before I selected the questions, nor had I seen the newspaper report. It was unfortunate—and I do not blame the member; it may just be the report—that the newspaper said that he was going to raise the matter. Mr Russell could not know that, of course, because he did not know whether his question would be selected. That was the point of order, I think, that Mr McNeil was raising. It is a nice point, but not one that we should linger over.

Future of Europe Convention

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): The main debate this afternoon is on motion S1M-3678, in the name of Jim Wallace, on the future of Europe convention, and two amendments to the motion.

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Mr Murray Tosh): I invite those members leaving the chamber to do so quickly and quietly.

I invite those members who wish to speak in the debate to press their request-to-speak buttons now. As a result of various interruptions, we are five minutes late in getting under way.

15:35

The Deputy First Minister and Minister for Justice (Mr Jim Wallace): I am pleased that we are having a debate today on a topic that is of considerable importance to Scotland. I have had exchanges with the European Committee on this topic, but there was always an expectation on both our parts that we would debate it in the chamber.

The outcomes of the future of Europe debate and the decisions that flow from the subsequent intergovernmental conference will hold the key to the future development and direction of the European Union.

Parliament will recall that the convention on the future of Europe was launched in February to consider a wide range of potential reforms. Those reforms are intended to modernise the union to prepare it for the impact of enlargement and to address public perceptions that the European Union has become too detached from its citizens.

The Scottish Executive strongly supports the work of the convention. We believe that the convention represents an innovative and inclusive approach that is entirely fitting for the issues at stake. We have sought to play a full part in the future of Europe debate. We are consulted on and contribute to the United Kingdom's position at the convention and I am pleased with the constructive working relationship that we have enjoyed in the life of the debate so far.

Our work with other influential European Union sub-member state Administrations culminated in the adoption of a declaration by 43 Administrations in Florence last month.

The First Minister has acted as rapporteur for a Committee of the Regions opinion on more democracy, transparency and efficiency in the EU. That opinion was adopted unanimously and will form a crucial plank of the committee's formal submission to the convention. The First Minister also made an important speech on that issue on 6 June to opinion formers in Brussels.

We will introduce policy proposals in advance of the convention's plenary debate on the role of sub-member state Administrations early in 2003.

The Executive is firmly pro-European. The European Union has delivered considerable benefits for Scotland and we believe that it will continue to do so. It has helped to secure lasting peace and stability in Europe. It provides the market for two thirds of our exports. It has delivered environmental, social and consumer benefits. Enlargement of the European Union will bring significant additional opportunities.

We are only a matter of days away from the crucial summit in Copenhagen when there will be the proposal to increase the number of member states. Through an enlarged European Union, we can help the fight against terrorism and crime because we recognise that the proponents of terrorism and crime are no respecters of boundaries.

European Union anti-terrorist measures, such as the European arrest warrant, will be more effective when they apply to 27 instead of 15 member states. Enlargement will also strengthen the European Union's anti-crime institutions.

Enlargement will bring large-scale economic benefits. Independent research suggests that the United Kingdom's gross domestic product might be boosted by up to £1.75 billion and that up to 300,000 extra British jobs might be created across the European Union. With its traditional outward focus and reputation for technical excellence and innovation, Scotland is ideally placed to make the most of those opportunities.

Phil Gallie (South of Scotland) (Con): Will the minister comment on the potential for the expansion of jobs in Scotland, given the evident drift from Scotland to some of the eastern European countries?

Mr Wallace: I salute the work done by the Scottish Council for Development and Industry to alert Scottish business to the potential in the candidate nations. In many respects, those nations are still developing economies that need the expertise and excellence we have in renewable technologies, for example, or the excellence we have in decommissioning at Dounreay. I believe that we are well placed to seize opportunities where we find them.

We want an EU that is more effective, and able to respond quickly to changing situations. It must be more efficient, and able to deliver value for time and money, with less bureaucracy. It must also be easier to understand. People need to know what the union stands for and must feel that its treaties and principles are relevant. I want a union that is closer to the citizen—more democratic, more transparent and more accountable.

Tommy Sheridan (Glasgow) (SSP): Does the minister agree that there are often occasions when we should be prepared to be a bit more disobedient as far as the European Union is concerned? It seems that other member countries are more willing to act to defend their indigenous industries than we are in the United Kingdom.

Mr Wallace: I cannot agree that breaking the rules ever puts one in a better position in the long term. However, just because one is pro-European, that does not mean that one accepts that everything that comes out of Europe is right. There will be occasions when we will disagree with Europe. The First Minister indicated just moments ago that we will fight a very hard case for Scotland's fishing industry. However, I cannot accept that breaking the rules pays dividends in the long term.

I believe that Scotland and other sub-member state Administrations have a significant part to play in delivering some of the aspirations that I have referred to. It is worth recalling that more than half of the EU's citizens are represented by a devolved Government. In the case of Scotland, 80 per cent of the functions devolved to this Parliament have a European Union dimension. We implement and enact European legislation, we administer European Union funds and we are the closest level of legislative Government to the citizens of Scotland. Increasing the role of devolved Government in the European Union is about enhancing, supporting and, above all, legitimising the way in which the European Union carries out its functions. Such reform offers solutions, and the convention cannot afford to overlook that.

Those themes have been the focus of the Executive's proposals, building on our previous policy statements. I am keen that those proposals are also informed by the views of this Parliament. I read with considerable interest the paper published this week by the European Committee, which continues to make a positive contribution to the debate.

We will take account of our consultation with Scottish civic society, which included seeking written views from major non-governmental organisations. We held regional seminars that were attended by small and medium-sized NGOs, we created a website seeking views by e-mail, we placed leaflets and posters in libraries, to attract the views of private individuals, and we wrote to schools. I am pleased that we were able to do that work in co-operation with the European Committee, which held a valuable seminar in the chamber on 16 September.

I have been encouraged by the response to our consultation. We received 38 written responses from organisations and private individuals, and 40 non-governmental organisations attended the seminars that we held in Dumfries, Edinburgh and Perth. Comments were very diverse, but there were some general themes. People want the European Union to focus on its core, headline activities. The majority of respondents saw a clear role for the European Union, but were concerned that it is overly bureaucratic and becomes involved in areas that are best left to other tiers of governance. There was some enthusiasm for examining the role that members of the European Parliament might play in reconnecting the European Union with its citizens. There was broad support for a constitutional treaty, provided that it is focused on the European Union's key objectives and does not pave the way for an expansion of European Union competence.

The message from business was that the Commission needs to sharpen its approach to economic growth and minimise unnecessary regulatory burdens, particularly for small and medium-sized businesses. It was also felt that there should be a more rigorous application of the principle of subsidiarity.

I was particularly pleased to see responses from a number of schools. After all, who is the future of Europe debate for if not our young people? They offered a particular focus on environmental and social issues, broadly supported a constitutional treaty and registered a desire for greater publicity on the activities and decisions of the European Union.

Taking all these elements into account, I would like to outline the Executive's key policy views. We must focus on issues that relate directly to the responsibilities of sub-member state Administrations rather than seeking to comment on every single aspect of the European Union's future development. Subsidiarity is a key issue. We have already made several calls for the establishment of a political mechanism for monitoring the application of the subsidiarity principle at an early stage in the European Union's legislative process. There has been broad support for that at the convention, whatever mechanism is established, and I believe that active sub-member state involvement will be crucial.

On a related theme, we need to raise the constitutional profile of the subsidiarity principle, which extends beyond the member states themselves. We will repeat our calls for greater use of framework legislation, which would allow implementing authorities such as the Scottish Executive and the Scottish Parliament to put European Union laws into practice in a way that is appropriate to specific Scottish circumstances. We need the EU to consult sub-member state Administrations at an early stage in the development of legislation and policy. Time that is spent in getting proposals right at the beginning will save considerable time over the piece.

We need greater transparency—for example, through the European Council meeting in public when it carries out its legislative role. There should also be an assessment of the potential financial impact of EU legislation on implementing authorities, compared to the value of benefits. Rather than establish a detailed catalogue of competences, the new constitutional treaty could usefully include a set of principles to govern when and how the EU acts.

Alongside those measures, we need to consider reform of the Committee of the Regions. We would not wish such reform to come at the expense of an enhanced role for individual sub-member state Administrations, but it is clear that the committee will continue to have a role. Obliging the European Commission to justify formally the extent to which it does or does not take heed of the committee's opinions, for example, would help.

Taken together, those ideas represent a comprehensive and helpful contribution to the future of Europe debate. I look forward to hearing what members think the convention should deliver for Scotland and to the Executive's continuing engagement with the future of Europe debate over the remaining life of the convention and through to the intergovernmental conference. I am optimistic about the outcomes of the debate for the EU and for Scotland's place within the EU and I am confident that the Executive and the Parliament will play its part in those developments.

I move,

That the Parliament acknowledges the many benefits that the European Union has delivered for Europe and for Scotland, welcomes the establishment of the Convention on the Future of Europe as an open and innovative means of addressing the issues now facing the European Union; believes that, in light of experience, the European Union needs to become more effective, efficient, easier to understand, democratic, transparent and accountable; recognises the role that Sub-Member State Administrations can play in realising these objectives; welcomes the Scottish Executive's engagement with Scottish civil society to stimulate discussion and to seek views on the Future of Europe; welcomes the contribution that the Executive has made to the debate so far, and calls on the Executive to press the Convention to bring forward proposals for strengthening the profile of the Subsidiarity Principle in the EU treaties, adopting a new mechanism for enforcing it which allows for full Sub-Member State Administration involvement, making greater use of framework legislation, consulting Sub-Member State Administrations at an early stage of policy development, generating greater transparency in European decision-making and introducing financial impact assessments for legislative proposals

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I invite Fiona Hyslop to speak to and move amendment S1M-3678.1.

15:46

Fiona Hyslop (Lothians) (SNP): I will move amendment S1M-3678.1, in the name of Richard Lochhead, who sends his apologies for being unable at short notice to speak in the debate.

Scotland's place in the wider world has been a topic of important debate, negotiation and indeed treaty not just in recent years with the development of the EU, but for centuries beforehand. The SNP agrees with the sentiment in the first part of the motion, as we recognise the role that Europe has played and in particular the important reason why the EU was established—to prevent any future European wars.

We recognise ourselves as Europeans, as many Scots do. There is always a danger that, on this shared island, people speak about Europeans as "them" and do not recognise that Europe is not apart from us. We are European as a country and Europeans as a people.

It is significant that there is no Scottish Parliament or Executive representation on the convention, although Business a.m. reported that Jack McConnell had pledged to fight for a place on it. He failed. Two SNP representatives—Professor Neil MacCormick and Councillor Keith Brown—are the only democratically elected Scottish representatives.

Phil Gallie: Given the emphasis that we all place on being a multiracial society, will the member explain what she meant when she said that we are European as a people?

Fiona Hyslop: Opinion polls that take the views of Scots are significant. Many Scots see themselves first as Scots, then as Europeans and thirdly as British. That is the view of the world of younger people in Scotland in particular and we must reflect that in our analysis.

The SNP supports a positive vision of enlargement, with more transparency, accountability, democracy and subsidiarity within the EU. We welcome the constitution or treaty—although we think that it should be subject to a referendum—and we see that Europe can develop in terms of confederation rather than federation. The SNP has consistently argued that any major constitutional change should be approved by referendum, whether in respect of the Maastricht treaty, devolution or future independence in Europe. I would be interested to know whether the minister agrees with that.

Scotland has played different roles as a nation state and as a sub-state. Some may want to view Scotland as a constitutional region. In our nation's history, we can point to times in which our focus has been to look north and east to our nordic neighbours—the Parliament played host to the Nordic Council seminar a few weeks ago—south to the Atlantic arc of Ireland and Portugal, east to the Baltic states and, of course, south to an auld alliance with France and a newer union with England.

In that context, I recognise the work of the convention and want to draw on some of the key debates. Scotland can see itself as an aspiring member state, a stateless nation or a constitutional region. Each provides a different prism through which to look at the convention's work and each perspective offers different angles on the evolving debate.

How does the current debate protect and promote the existing rights of devolved nations, particularly in an expanding Europe of accession states? From what perspective is the Executive trying to bat for Scotland? Is the Executive really batting for Britain and a centralised bigger member state perspective and clawing back from the Liege declaration and the Flanders declaration that was signed by Henry McLeish? I fear that what we have seen from the Executive is missed opportunities and mixed messages.

Is it not the case that even under the limited powers of devolution, Jack McConnell is limiting the powers and influence of a devolved Scotland even further by failing to back the Liege declaration's call—which, importantly, is backed by the European Committee of this Parliament—for powers for sub-member state legislatures that would give full access to the European Court of Justice?

Irene Oldfather (Cunninghame South) (Lab): Is the member aware that the Scottish Executive has signed the Florence declaration, which encompasses much of what was discussed at Liege and Flanders?

Fiona Hyslop: I am aware of that, but if Irene Oldfather reads the SNP amendment she will see that our key consideration is access to the European Court of Justice. I will develop that point further. Jack McConnell is isolated among the so-called regions with legislative competence over direct access to European Court of Justice. Bearing in mind the crisis in our fishing industry, I think that that might prove to be essential. If members consider the recent ferries debacle, they will see that it would have been in Scotland's interest to have had direct access to the European Court of Justice when our subsidiarity was being infringed.

When it comes to Europe, who is serious about this nation playing as full a role as it can? Actions speak louder than words or, I fear, the spin of the presentation of the First Minister as rapporteur of the Committee of the Regions and chair of the group of regions with legislative competence. It is interesting that that group is made up of many small regional Governments that are all calling for access to the European Court of Justice—a position that the group's newly appointed chair does not support. We are in the strange situation in which even Germany, as a full member state, calls for access to the European Court of Justice for Parliaments such as this one, but the Scottish Executive and UK Government do not.

Jack McConnell has, on our behalf—although it has taken until today for the Executive to ask for Parliament's agreement to this—been talking up the need for a subsidiarity champion, yet the convention's Mendez de Vigo working group on subsidiarity has dumped the subsidiarity champion idea. The new plan is for national, member state Parliaments to review proposed EU legislation before its consideration by the European Parliament and to issue a reasoned objection if subsidiarity seems likely to be infringed.

Scotland will therefore have to rely on Westminster to decide whether our subsidiarity is being infringed. That movement makes it clear that an enlarged Europe with more, but smaller, member states is emerging and that the right of independent nation states is prevailing over those of devolved states. That reinforces the argument that Scotland's interests would be served as a full member state.

Who leads for Scotland? The Scottish Executive fishing minister speaks for Scotland but does not necessarily lead for Scotland. Is it not significant that the European Parliament's constitutional committee report, as adopted on 28 November this year, notes the possibility under article 203 of the EC treaty for regional ministers to represent their member state at the Council in accordance with the state's own constitutional arrangements. I had a very interesting discussion about that issue last week with the Belgian ambassador in London.

How is the Scottish Executive serving the Highlands and Islands when an Office for National Statistics blunder has meant that the Highlands and Islands has lost objective 1 status? The Executive must argue for reclassification of the transitional payment as objective 1 so that the Highlands and Islands can get transitional payments post-2006.

It is important that the Executive should send a clear message. The Executive seems to want to make friends in Europe but do nothing on behalf of Scotland with that friendship. It wants to sit back and watch Westminster shape our future in Europe. I do not want to wait and watch. I want Scotland to decide for ourselves and form our own future as a full member state of the communities of Europe.

I move amendment S1M-3678.1, to leave out from "Scottish Executive's" to end and insert:

"Convention's proposal for a constitution or constitutional treaty for the European Union which will delimit the powers of the EU and member states; believes that the people of Scotland must be given the opportunity to approve any such treaty in a referendum; supports the Liege Declaration and the European Committee's calls for powers for sub-member state legislatures that would give Scotland full access to the European Court of Justice; urges the Scottish Executive to actively pursue this objective, and recognises that the most effective representation in the EU for small nations like Scotland is gained by full membership."

15:54

Ben Wallace (North-East Scotland) (Con): The Scottish Conservatives are delighted to have the opportunity to debate the future of Europe and Scotland's place in it. We are, of course, the party that took Scotland and the United Kingdom into the EU when many in the chamber were campaigning against it. Of course, there is never anybody in the Labour party now who campaigned against it. It is like trying to find someone who used to vote for Margaret Thatcher in Scotland—a lot of people did, but one can never find anyone who says that they did.

The Conservatives were at the heart of the enlargement when Spain, Portugal and Greece entered and attained membership. That is why we welcome enlargement, although we also see the need for reforms. We will not forget that that need is set against the background of a Europe that is perceived, rightly, to be distant from its citizens, elitist, undemocratic and secretive in the extreme. We welcome the Scottish Executive's reaffirmation of the principle of subsidiarity, which was set out and fought for by John Major's Government. It is interesting to note the remarkable similarity between the Conservative party's position, as submitted to the convention by my colleague from Westminster Richard Spring, and that of the First Minister.

We must avoid forcing changes in the wrong direction. We should not use the principle that because an enlarged Europe will not be able to agree on everything, we should always settle matters by a majority. It would be better if we agreed that the European Union should not legislate or become involved when it cannot achieve unanimity. The people of Europe have consented to the pooling of sovereignty to such an extent that we have formed a federal state. The best way in which to bring Europe closer to the people is to return decisions back to the member states. For example, as Fiona Hyslop said, powers should be given back to the Scottish Parliament rather than to Westminster. That is preferable to going above the heads of the people of the member states and straight to the centralised European Union.

Ms Margo MacDonald (Lothians) (SNP): Does the member agree that another important way of ensuring that the people of the EU do not become disenchanted by the idea of Europeanism, would be to vote no to the euro? That issue undercuts all the constitutional questions that we are talking about.

Ben Wallace: It is clear that the euro is a federal currency and that it is one building block in producing a federal state. Now that I have used the word "federal", my Liberal Democrat colleagues will accuse me of being paranoid, but we should remember that the Liberal Democrat representative on the convention, Andrew Duff, is also head of the federalist group in the European Parliament. Europe is awash with quotes from major political figures extolling the concept of a more federalised Europe. Today, Romano Prodi said:

"National leaders should act on their commitment to make Europe a superpower".

In response to Margo MacDonald, I point out that we should remember that the euro is, by anyone's standard, a federal currency. We should also remember Europe's desire, as confirmed by Giscard d'Estaing and Romano Prodi, to expand qualified majority voting to cover practically every area, including foreign policy, defence and taxation. That can be seen only as a drive towards a united states of Europe. Of course, that is not my phrase; it is Giscard d'Estaing's. People might think that that is just a phrase, but Europe is fast becoming a federal state; it walks, talks and looks like a federal state in all but name. Europe's version of integration is becoming driven by federalism.

The matter gets worse because the Liberal Democrat Andrew Duff—I refer frequently to the Liberal Democrats because Jim Wallace is one—proposed in article 18 of his submission to the convention that in the future shape of Europe, a member state's decision to try to withdraw from Europe should not be up to the people of that country. He says that a state that wants to secede or pull away from membership of the European Union would require permission either from more than three quarters of the member states or all the citizens of Europe. The last time such a suggestion was made was in Yugoslavia.

Dr Winnie Ewing (Highlands and Islands) (SNP): Will the member give way?

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The member is in his last minute. I am not prepared—

Dr Ewing: Does the member recognise that what he says on the withdrawal or acceptance of states flies in the face of the views of senior legal advisers?

The Deputy Presiding Officer: There are different rules for Dr Ewing.

Dr Ewing: Those advisers were the Scottish judge who was the first ever top judge of the European Court of Justice, Lord Mackenzie-Stuart, and the chief legal adviser to the Commission, Dr Noё. They said that if a member state broke up, the umbrella of legislation that applied to the whole would continue to apply to the bits. That is settled law so there is no point in trying to restate it.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: You asked for that Mr Wallace—you have 30 seconds left.

Ben Wallace: The intervention was not really relevant to the point that I was making. One reason for lodging our amendment was that we do not agree with the motion's congratulation of the Executive on the work that it has done. Most of the consultation has been done either by the Scottish Parliament's European Committee or by organisations such as the Confederation of British Industry and the Scottish Council for Development and Industry.

In fact, when I asked the Scottish Executive a parliamentary question on what it had done, Jim Wallace said that its website on the future of Europe debate had received eight hits. When I asked the First Minister whom he had consulted on Scotland's position in his submission to the Committee of the Regions, he said that he had answered in a personal capacity. We cannot, therefore, agree that the Scottish Executive has consulted and included the whole of Scotland, as it clearly has not.

The UK's position on the form of the EU has been inconsistent. We went from supporting an elected upper chamber to supporting a permanent delegation to supporting a written constitution, and we have had no clear direction from the EU member states. I move amendment S1M-3678.2, to leave out from second "welcomes" to "so far" and insert:

"condemns the Scottish Executive's failure to engage Scottish civil society in the debate; is disappointed in the inconsistent position of Her Majesty's Government and the Prime Minister on the future shape of the EU; further re-affirms the principle of unanimity in key policy sectors".

16:00

Irene Oldfather (Cunninghame South) (Lab): I apologise for the fact that I have a heavy cold. I will try to plough my way through my speech as quickly as I can.

I welcome the debate. Wearing my committee hat, I recall the number of times that we asked the Deputy First Minister to try to secure a debate on this subject. I appreciate the fact that he has done so in advance of publishing the Executive's final submission to the convention. I know that he is willing to listen to views that members put forward, which is to be welcomed.

It is difficult to do justice to the motion in five minutes. I begin with a few words about the convention process. For the first time in the revision of treaties, the people of Europe are being consulted. The open and transparent way in which the convention is operating is appreciated as a genuine attempt to equip the Union for the challenges and opportunities that lie ahead.

However, it is vital that we ensure that the convention listens to and acts on our views. Therefore, although the process must be welcomed, it is disappointing that the convention has not yet set up a working party on the role of regional and local government in Europe. There is still time to do that—some of the recommendations in the Napolitano report, which the European Parliament will vote on next month, refer to such measures. I urge all members to discuss those recommendations with MEPs in their parties and to consider how we can yet set up a working party to examine the specific role of local and regional government within the convention.

I welcome the fact that the Parliament is conducting its own deliberations in an open and transparent way. Colleagues from all parties welcomed the conference with civic Scotland that was held in the chamber on 16 September, which involved some 120 members of the public. Giving our ideas that kind of democratic legitimacy strengthens the case that we put forward.

The motion refers to the benefits that the European Union can bring. We started our conference on 16 September by asking the question: what is Europe for? There was a clear understanding that the EU is a force for peace and stability. Enlargement and the extension of the internal market to some 500 million consumers offer the possibility for trade and business development. Over the past few years, I have also been pleased with the social progress that Europe has made. Europe is about sustainable development and improvements in our environment. It is important to move away from the idea that it is only about foreign affairs.

One of the most positive opportunities to arise from membership of the European Union is the opportunity for interregional co-operation. In my constituency, schoolchildren from what might be called a socially disadvantaged area participate with children from Pisa, Italy, in an intercultural exchange involving language and art. That is the kind of practical demonstration of the benefits of the European Union that citizens easily recognise.

However, we must face up to concerns about the way in which the EU operates and the fact that citizens feel it to be somewhat remote from their everyday lives. We must consider how we can make the Union more efficient and easier to understand.

As Europe's newest and youngest Parliament, we sometimes underestimate just how far we have come in adopting the principles and practices of modern governance. Indeed, I was in London last week at a meeting of the central-local government partnership, at which I mentioned the principles on which the Scottish Parliament is founded: the sharing of power, accountability and accessibility, openness and transparency, and equal opportunities. I believe—this view was articulated in the European Committee's report—that the EU could learn much from those basic principles and practices of good governance, which we in Scotland sometimes take for granted but which are often regarded as innovative elsewhere.

Ms MacDonald: Will the member give way?

Irene Oldfather: Yes, certainly.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: No. We cannot keep doing this. The member's time is almost up.

Irene Oldfather: I apologise to Margo MacDonald.

I want to say a few words about consultative legitimacy, an issue that is raised in the motion. The issue was addressed in a Committee of the Regions opinion prepared by Lord Tope and agreed by the COR the other week. The European Committee's report also deals with the matter. The specific issue is that bodies that are ultimately responsible for implementing legislation have a right to be consulted at an earlier, formative stage in the process. A great deal of support is emerging across Europe for greater access to the Commission at the pre-legislative phase.

I wanted to speak about many other matters, such as the simplification of the treaties, increasing awareness and having a Europe day to look at the European Commission's forward legislative programme. However, I can see that the Presiding Officer will not allow me to speak about those issues, so I will just say that a great deal of work has been going on across Europe to influence the debate on the future of Europe. I am delighted that the Scottish Parliament is having the opportunity to have its say. I am reminded that, four years ago, that would not have been possible. It is important that we are playing our part and influencing the future of our children and our children's children in Europe. I am happy to support the motion.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We come now to the open debate, in which we will have speeches of four minutes.

16:07

Dr Winnie Ewing (Highlands and Islands) (SNP): A matter that concerned everyone on the European scene for many years was the secrecy of the European Council. Members of the European Parliament constantly tried to unveil the secrets and find out about major discussions. Sometimes we could find out, if we had a friend at court who told us what went on inside. That happened to me sometimes—I have to admit that it was usually through an Irish connection. That secrecy is still with us and is one of the big problems that all the institutions of Europe face. It is not good that there is secrecy about the UK's negotiations. Often, we cannot find out what has happened in the negotiations. In a world that is looking for more openness, be that in the UK, Europe or elsewhere, we are not doing too well in the secrecy stakes.

I welcome the work that the European Committee has done for its report. There is much need for simplification as far as European citizens are concerned. We need idiots' guides to the treaties, citizens' rights and the powers of the EU and member states. We also need a guide to petition access, because I do not think that many people realise that they have it. Perhaps we also need a good word about the Erasmus programme, which I had the pleasure of thinking up and introducing.

I congratulate the European Committee on its report on Scotland's representation in the European Union. I agree with section 149, which suggests that the Scottish Parliament should have a presence in Brussels as the Scottish Parliament and not through other presences that might be suggested as options. I also agree with section 113, which states:

"The ... biggest area for improvement is ... gathering and dissemination of information ... the trick is secure access to the right sort of information at the right moment".

When I was a member of the European Committee, I always said that the problem is not that we look at and comment on legislation that has been passed; the problem is finding out when an issue important to Scotland is to be given to a rapporteur, so that we can approach that rapporteur with our input before he has has even drafted his full report. I am afraid that we have not got round to doing that, but I welcome the European Committee's report, which seems to agree with that stance.

I have a couple of points on the constitution. We do not agree with a superstate, of course. We believe in a supranational union that acknowledges shared sovereignty. Four tiers must be recognised: the member states, the EU, the internal territorial legislative units and local authorities, which obviously have a part to play. I believe that, in the future, the executive power should be the European Commission, which should be answerable to the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament, and that the Council of Ministers should become part of a bicameral legislature. That is the only way in which we can ever hope to have a democratic Europe. People might disagree with that, but I think that that situation is inevitable.

I agree that subsidiarity should be redefined and I think that the members of the Committee of the Regions—I totally approve of that body, in whose setting up I was involved—should be sent by the regions, not the states. If they are not, it is a nonsense to call it the Committee of the Regions.

As Fiona Hyslop said, we support having a referendum on the major constitutional change that Europe faces. Given the powers that be in London, I doubt that we will get one, but we should still press for it.

As Fiona Hyslop also said, it is clearly ludicrous to say that the Committee of the Regions and legislative assemblies inside member states should not have access to the European Court of Justice.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Please wind up, Dr Ewing.

Dr Ewing: Is my time up already? I feel as though I have just got started.

My view is that an internal legislative assembly should be able to have direct representation in Europe. I reject the myth that being in Europe as part of the UK gives us clout. In fact, we have the opposite of clout. Look at fishing. Look at what happened with objective 1 funding. Look at the numerical representation that we would have if we were a normal country. Even though we will be surrounded by the new member states—all of them independent countries that will have a seat at the top table—the unambitious unionists are quite happy for us to be a substate.

16:12

Sarah Boyack (Edinburgh Central) (Lab): I welcome the fact that we are debating this important issue, which the European Committee has been discussing for months. Having tried to follow the debate about the future of Europe, I think that it is appropriate that the key issues on our agenda today relate to transparency, subsidiarity—although I hate the word—and making the EU more efficient and effective. Above all, however, the key issues are about ways in which the EU institutions can relate more effectively to the citizens whom they represent.

The key to the debate is the need to increase the democratic legitimacy of the institutions of Europe, by reforming them and making them fit for the 21st century. The institutions were developed 50 years ago, in another era, after the second world war. As we start the new century, we are facing a larger Europe. The states that are joining the Union are looking for security, economic progress and the high quality of life that many of the states that are already in the EU almost take for granted. This is a radical time to be debating the future of Europe.

I was disappointed by the Tory amendment and by Ben Wallace's speech. The Executive and MSPs have made a significant effort to stimulate debate. I have been to a series of seminars—I am conscious that I have missed some—as well as debates and discussions on the issue. In those meetings, there has been an attempt to engage people from trade unions, small businesses and so on, rather than the usual suspects and people like us who are already engaged in politics. It is important that we increase awareness.

Ben Wallace: Will the member take an intervention?

Sarah Boyack: No. Ben Wallace has already had a chance to speak.

I was also disappointed by the SNP's amendment, although I agree with some of the spirit behind it. Much of what Irene Oldfather would have talked about if she had had 20 minutes would have related to the detail of the committee's recommendations, which are about ensuring that Scotland's perspective is represented at the table. We do that through the UK Government and through a plethora of organisations in the convention on the future of Europe. The convention does not comprise many people and they are not necessarily the most representative: there is an appalling gender imbalance and there are few young people. There is an issue about how we who are outside the convention can have our voices heard inside it. That is why this debate is important.

In the UK, we have had the debate about our constitutional future; the challenge is to make it work. Every two weeks, the European Committee of the Scottish Parliament scrutinises forthcoming issues. We also talk to our colleagues in the European Parliament. The debate is about getting the best of both worlds: being part of the wider UK, being able to network with other regions and member states in Europe and being part of the bigger picture. When we are finally presented with the convention's conclusions, it will be very difficult to make major changes. That is why we need to make our comments now. It is also why our different political groups need to engage in that debate now from their different perspectives.

It is difficult to imagine the process coming to a conclusion at the moment, because there are very different political strands in Europe. One strand advocates an approach similar to the one that we take, with asymmetrical devolution and different solutions throughout the UK. We make that work and we network. There is the much more prescriptive approach, which is perhaps the French style, which is to write everything down—

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I beg your pardon; I pressed the wrong button. May we have Miss Boyack's sound back, please? You have it back, Miss Boyack.

Sarah Boyack: I had not noticed you warning me, but I take that as a subtle hint that I should finish soon.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: You have about 20 seconds.

Sarah Boyack: Concluding the process will be a challenge. That is why we need the debate. The Executive motion is positive. It challenges us to make the most of the changes that are happening in Europe.

There will be new states in the European Union, some of which have had conflicts in the past couple of decades. They are looking for security and the economic, social and environmental progress that we have started to take for granted.

We are now part of Europe and the challenge is to make that work more effectively. That means more transparency. I welcome Jim Wallace's comments about Council meetings, which take place in secret but make laws that apply to us all. There will still be scope for negotiation and little discussions in the backrooms, but the big decisions that affect us all—and, in future, the 500 million citizens of Europe—need to be taken in public. That ethos should run throughout the whole European Union and its dealings.

16:17

John Young (West of Scotland) (Con): I am glad that Murray Tosh is not the President of the United States. If he was, I would shudder to think that he had pressed the wrong button.

I will try to be brief. I know that time is of the essence, so I will try to do my speech in three and a half minutes.

The British empire is gone, apart from some small dependencies and islands with an estimated total population of 125,000. The Commonwealth has undergone change and will, no doubt, continue to do so. The big power brokers are the United States and China. I believe that it is imperative that a small country such as Britain should be a major player in Europe. The mechanism that is under discussion today is therefore of supreme importance.

There is now a queue of probable new entrants from eastern Europe, plus Cyprus and Turkey. That means considerable diversity. The Conservatives oppose a European constitution because that would be a further step down the road to a unitary superstate. A new treaty, rather than a constitution, would be preferred. Most member states share that view.

The nearest analogies to a European superstate of which I can think would be the Roman and Napoleonic empires, along with Hitler's third Reich, but all three used warfare to conquer and dictatorship to rule. As has been said, the Conservatives want arrangements to be based on a common, basic set of laws—rather than a constitution—with the emphasis on securing a single market for trade.

A key function of the convention should be to promote and develop democracy and accountability not only at a European level, but within nation states. The power to initiate legislation must be transferred from the Commission to the European Parliament. That is democracy. What do we read in Jim Wallace's motion? We read the coalition's favourite words:

"effective, efficient ... democratic, transparent and accountable".

I am not criticising Jim Wallace's choice of words, but we hear those words repeatedly from members of the Executive parties.

At the national level, member states' Parliaments should have greater powers, along with Governments and civic society. The subsidiarity principle—that power should be devolved to the level closest to the citizen wherever possible—is at the core of Conservative thinking on the convention. A Conservative MEP, Timothy Kirkhope, has proposed the creation of the post of European arbiter, who would be elected every five years to adjudicate on cases in which it was felt that competencies had been allocated to the wrong institution.

Decisions on the future of Europe will have a direct effect on present and future generations. On that, we are all united.

16:19

Colin Campbell (West of Scotland) (SNP): I will not attempt to emulate John Young and speak as quickly as he did, but I will try to stay within my time.

I have been a member of the European Committee since the start of 2001. The committee is characterised by a genuine desire to serve the Scottish Parliament's needs and to forge successful links with the EU. In our future of Europe debate, we brought together an extensive report that expresses the committee's collective view on the situation as we find it. Many of the report's conclusions were arrived at following prolonged discussion and compromise, so that all members could sign up to it. Other aspects were quite easily agreed on.

I concur with the view expressed by other members that the most important justification for the European Union is the fact that it has saved western Europe from the kind of conflicts that scourged the whole continent in the 20th century—the first and second world wars, in which all Europeans, including Scots, English, Irish and Welsh Europeans, paid a very heavy price for the stupidity of politicians. All the EU's economic and political structures are by-products of that important reason for its existence.

The convention on the future of Europe became necessary because those who had become too closely involved in the processes of Europe were losing touch with the people whom they were supposed to engage and serve. That is the convention's value. It attempts to engage nations, regions and peoples in the debate on the way ahead for the EU. My colleague Lloyd Quinan is engaged in that process at the moment and at the weekend. As the European Committee's report bears witness, we engaged citizens in the debate in a Scottish parliamentary convention in September.

The way ahead must take into account all the diverse views of the EU's people. The SNP's view is that the EU should exercise certain powers based on pooled sovereignty from its member states, but that each state should retain sovereignty in constitutional, fiscal and other areas.

As far as I can tell, there is little disagreement—except on the part of the Conservatives—on the need for a constitution or constitutional treaty for the EU. Not to have one is to maintain a situation in which precedents can be established by the political experts in Europe. Those people often have their own agendas in mind, which might lock people, regions and nations into situations not of their choosing. Rather than viewing constitutions as iron bands, we should treat them as something that might control the wilder, federal inclinations of some people in Europe.

I totally support the SNP amendment's call for any new constitutional arrangement for the EU to be put to the people of Scotland in a referendum. Apart from giving the constitution democratic endorsement, such an exercise would engage the people, which is surely part of the reason for having the convention.

The SNP amendment also supports the proposal in the European Committee's report that

"'regions' with legislative powers should have the right of direct access to the European Court of Justice to challenge Community legislation."

I point out that the word "regions" was given inverted commas in deference to SNP committee members. Without a right of direct access, the process is a bit of a waste of time.

Although I believe that the European Committee does the best that it can, given the constraints under which it acts, I am often consumed by a great cloud of despair when I contemplate the voluntary blindness of my non-SNP colleagues, who cannot see that all our discussions on our vital access to Europe would be so much easier were Scotland a normal, independent nation. I say to Sarah Boyack, who thinks that the debate is over, that the debate will not be over until the Scottish flag flies in its own right, representing a normal nation, both in Europe and at the United Nations.

16:23

Helen Eadie (Dunfermline East) (Lab): I support the motion in Jim Wallace's name. Sarah Boyack's views on our efforts to engage with the people of Scotland certainly chime with mine. I would be surprised if the Parliament were not unanimous in thinking that the work of the convention on the future of Europe is vital. The convention is undertaking key work, which will shape the decisions that are taken at the intergovernmental conference in 2004. The Parliament has consistently supported the development of Scotland's influence on the corridors of power at EU level.

In past years, the challenge that has been faced at every level of government has been how to engage civic society in the development of policy in the EU. As Irene Oldfather said, the Parliament made a good start by holding our own convention—the conference that we held in the chamber in September—which involved participants from all over Scotland, including some young people. For many years, I have been eager to witness such engagement.

Ben Wallace has met someone who has always been very positive about Europe. I campaigned for the yes campaign in the 1975 referendum, when I was living and working in London. I am a member of the executive committee of the European Movement in Scotland, a cross-party organisation whose patrons include Jack McConnell, Alex Salmond, Jim Wallace and Lord Younger. I am a member of the Labour Movement in Europe Scotland and was formerly a member of the association of democratic socialists in Europe.

Only last week I had the privilege of attending a meeting in Edinburgh at which Gisela Stuart, one of the democratically elected United Kingdom representatives at the convention, was the guest speaker. Gisela outlined the work of the working group that she chairs, which is considering the role of Parliaments across the EU. She was very interested to learn about the work that Scotland's politicians are doing in the context of the EU and was able to hear the views of many members of the public who attended the meeting.

I have no doubt that it is critical for every member of the Parliament to campaign actively to ensure that the voices of our people are heard more clearly in Europe. The ways in which we can do that are outlined in the European Committee's report. We have said that a constitutional treaty should be drafted that will simplify all existing legislation—that is an important task. We must strive to improve access and increase participation. Sharing power and accountability are also important.

The initiatives that the Scottish Executive took in the Flanders, Liège and Florence declarations and that the Scottish Parliament's European Committee took this October, as a founder member of a new network of regional parliamentary European committees, are to be applauded. Those initiatives are designed to strengthen the voices of regional Parliaments across the EU. At the most recent meeting of the European Committee, we agreed that the committee convener should be in contact with the conveners of European committees of other regional Parliaments.

Ben Wallace: Helen Eadie highlights the good work that the Parliament has done to engage with people. Does she find it regrettable that the Scottish Executive's motion does not mention the role that the Parliament, the European Committee and members of all parties have played in promoting the debate on the future of Europe?

Helen Eadie: From discussions with the Deputy First Minister, officials of the Scottish Executive and Labour members of the Executive, I know that the Executive is committed to and supportive of initiatives that the European Committee has taken. For example, recently I spoke to the Deputy First Minister about organising school quizzes throughout Scotland and found that I was pushing at an open door. Whenever we approach the Scottish Executive, our initiatives are taken up.

We understand the complexities of the European Union's decision-making process. The challenge for us all is to simplify and make much more transparent the way in which decisions are made. Irene Oldfather mentioned the goal and prize of peace, which motivated the founding fathers and mothers of the EU. We are still challenged and exercised by those goals. Only by securing agreements and treaties, as the convention proposes, and by enlarging the European Union, can we ensure the peaceful development of Europe for our people.

Because of the work of the Parliament's European Committee, the Scottish Executive, our partners in local government and members of the European Parliament, Scotland is making a real impact. Scotland is punching above its weight in Europe. Scotland's enthusiasm for and involvement in Europe is renowned at all levels of government in Europe. I welcome recent developments in the European Committee, which now deals with pre-Council agenda setting as well as post-Council scrutiny.

The main challenge that confronts us is that of ensuring connectivity between Europe's citizens and Europe's institutions. I believe that the Parliament's European Committee has forged a positive relationship with the Scottish Executive and with ministers, who have embraced enthusiastically the commitment of all enthusiasts for Europe in Scotland.

16:29

Mr Jamie Stone (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD): The great thing about having a middle slot in a debate of this nature is that one may unashamedly make a couple of constituency points. I intend to do that.

In Donald Gorrie fashion, I will dispose of what has been said so far by saying that Europe is a good thing. The two points that I want to make will come as no surprise to members.

There has been mention today of objective 1 assistance for the Highlands. We have heard the allegation that the calculation was made wrongly in the first place and that it is not in the power of Europe to go back and regrant objective 1 assistance.

Dr Ewing: It is.

Mr Stone: Some people have said that. The point is that the past is the past and we cannot change it. However, we can change the future.

As Dr Ewing will recall, when the decision was made, John Farquhar Munro and I—and others—made what I believe was the cogent argument that had Inverness not been included in the equation for the Highlands and Islands, other parts of the Highlands would have qualified for objective 1 assistance. At a recent Finance Committee meeting, I took that up with witnesses, and it was confirmed that that was the case. When Wales applied for objective 1 assistance, it fine-tuned the boundaries for its application and so was successful.

I exhort the Executive and the powers that be to ensure that next time round we look for a more sensitive and accurately targeted method of securing objective 1 funding. That relates to the efficiency and transparency that we have talked about.

My second point will come as absolutely no surprise to members, because it touches on the dairy industry. For the record, I declare an interest in my brother's cheese-making business. I remember that when I was involved in the business some years ago, we had to do up what was essentially an old steading and turn it into premises in which one could make cheese in proper modern conditions. I remember visiting a camembert-making plant in France and being struck by the different interpretation of the laws. We have all heard that argument before, again and again—I see Jim Wallace looking wearily at his papers. The point is that one should not carp or criticise, because it is a strong reason to engage with Europe. It would make enormous sense for us to get in there and put our views across further.

I remember when Nora Radcliffe and I were in Brussels earlier in the year. We talked to MEPs, who bemoaned the difficulty of getting a story about the hard work of all parties into the press.

Fiona Hyslop: On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it not important that the member addresses the terms of the motion? I understand that he has not mentioned the word "convention" once.

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Mr George Reid): I think that the member is just within the limits and no more. Not too much more cheese, please.

Mr Stone: I want to make a point about transparency, which is within the terms of the motion. It is a sad fact that the good work of our MEPs cannot always be got at. I think that Fiona Hyslop would accept that as a fair and valid point.

I support the motion. The more that we can engage with ordinary people to get them to understand, and the more that we can converse with Europe, the more that we can tackle problems such as the fine tuning of objective 1 funding and the carping about regulations, and bring across the value of Europe to the ordinary people of this country, who matter.

16:33

Mr Kenny MacAskill (Lothians) (SNP): Quoting selectively from history is always difficult and dangerous. John Young mentioned Rome, Napoleon and Hitler as historical analogies. I prefer to use the Hanseatic league and Charlemagne's holy Roman empire as better analogies of the sort of European Union that we hope to create.

We have to recognise that the argument about the UK and Scotland remaining in the European Union might be set, as Sarah Boyack said. The debate now is about the type of union that we want to create and whether it has a social aspect or whether it is simply a free market. I certainly do not believe that the free market can be allowed to remain unregulated and uncontrolled. We require there to be a social dimension to Europe.

Our society is at an historic juncture. We can either go in the direction of a north European democracy, to which I think our membership of the European Union would add and from which we would gain a great deal, or we can go down the road taken by the United States, the UK at present and, indeed, Australia, which would present significant problems. Where the societies and economies of those countries are going holds no allure for me. We have growing disparities of income, wealth and power; we have the dislocation of political aspects, such as lower turnouts in elections; and we have myriad social problems.

Ben Wallace: Will the member give way?

Mr MacAskill: Not at the moment.

The fact of the matter is that going into Europe offers great opportunities. It is about making a choice that is not simply about better economic fortunes for ourselves, but about what sort of society we want to create not only for ourselves but for the whole of the European Union as it is and as it expands. That we will go in that direction is probably an historical inevitability. It would be better if we were to go willingly rather than grudgingly and if we were to go sooner rather than later. We must go in that direction.

My colleagues have made points about independence in Europe with which I fully agree. It is a pity that Wendy Alexander is not in the chamber. Her view is that the issue is about interdependence rather than independence. It is about both independence and interdependence. That raises the question of fields and levels of responsibility.

In the 21st century Europe in which we live and in which our children's children's children will grow up, some matters will be dealt with at a European level and others, such as those affecting a small island such as the UK, will be dealt with on an inter-island basis. I submit that it is better to have matters dealt with on the basis of equality than to be dictated to. Some matters, such as whom and what to tax and what to spend the revenue on, will remain within the control of the democratically elected representatives of our nation state.

Ben Wallace: Will the member take an intervention?

Mr MacAskill: No, I will not take an intervention.

In the new European Union that will develop, it is not a question of independence or of interdependence; it is a question of both. It is a question of fields and levels of responsibility.

How should we play an active part? We can participate or we can spectate. At present, as Scotland is not an independent member of the European Union, we are simply spectators. I do not want to use inflammatory language about being bag-carriers, but we cannot participate to any great extent. We can go to a convention, but we cannot vote. We do not have the right to participate in consideration of whether there should be qualified majority voting on this, that or the next thing.

If we are to play a part in the formation of a new Europe—which might not be the same as the Europe that we are discussing or actively seeking at the moment—and to participate in the journey that Europe is undertaking, we require to be represented as an independent nation state.

Although I hope that we participate in the convention as fully as we can, ultimately, if we are to make the best of Europe—which is essential for our society and for future generations—we must participate in such events as an independent nation state. We should not necessarily seek greater powers, but we should not accept fewer powers.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We move to winding-up speeches. We are on schedule.

16:37

Mr John Home Robertson (East Lothian) (Lab): The European Union is adapting, modernising and, above all, expanding into a new role for the 21st century. I am afraid that the same cannot be said of the Opposition parties from which we have heard. As we might expect, they seem to be well and truly stuck in their respective grooves.

The Tories still have an unhealthy obsession with the F-word and they are fundamentally Eurosceptic—which, in normal language, means anti-European. Although that is not the position of Ben Wallace, who makes constructive contributions to the European Committee's deliberations, it is the position of his party. As for the nationalists, as ever, they are more interested in breaking up the British union than they are in developing the European Union. I am glad that I have got that off my chest.

I pay tribute to all my colleagues on the European Committee, regardless of their party. We have had a constructive discussion about the future of Europe. Our inquiry led to the publication yesterday of our report on the future of Europe. The report's key recommendation is the establishment of a clear role for regions with legislative power within the EU. We also propose that the EU should adopt the underlying principles adopted by the Scottish Parliament: power sharing, accountability, access and participation and equal opportunities. Those principles have served as good, sound principles for the Parliament and they could usefully be adopted by the European Parliament.

A Europe of 500 million people that extends from the Atlantic to the Russian border is a phenomenal enterprise. It represents a colossal economic market that should offer the basis for a new era of security and development. As John Young indicated, it is completely different from all the dynasties and blocs that have gone before. It is not an empire that is controlled by one strong nation; it is a free partnership of nations, regions and peoples.

The expansion of the EU is an extremely ambitious enterprise. The existing institutions are under great strain with just 15 members and they cannot possibly survive in a union of 25 members plus. The rotating presidency will become impossible. The Council must be radically reformed. The Commission must be brought under effective control and scrutiny. The European Parliament must take on more responsibility and prove itself worthy of that responsibility. From a Scottish perspective, we must co-operate with regions such as Flanders and Catalonia to establish clear rights and responsibilities for regions with legislative powers in modern Europe.

I hate the word "subsidiarity", but if we get the right conclusions to the convention's deliberations on the future of Europe, the principle of subsidiarity should be so deeply engrained in the culture of the union that the word need never be spoken again. That should be the objective. An obvious example of how the idea could work better is the management of the fisheries adjacent to our coasts.

The European Union is about prosperity, security and co-operation among the peoples of Europe. It means policies and funding to address social and environmental problems and the active engagement of people throughout the union in a new citizens' Europe. That will not simply happen. There is a lot of cynicism out there about every level of representative government, but people may have forgotten just how awful all the alternatives to democracy and co-operation can be. I happen to be one of the older members of this Parliament but even I was born three years after the end of the second world war. Nevertheless, during my time in Bosnia, I saw a little glimpse of how badly things can go wrong even in today's Europe.

The importance of achieving a successful outcome to the future of Europe debate cannot be overemphasised. The alternatives to democracy and co-operation in Europe could be a return to the European history of division and poverty and far worse. We owe it to future generations to get it right.

16:42

Phil Gallie (South of Scotland) (Con): The debate has been interesting to say the least. John Home Robertson and several other members, including Irene Oldfather, Colin Campbell and Sarah Boyack, mentioned the peace benefits as the reason for bringing Europeans together. However, none of them seemed to remember that perhaps the key factor was the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation. NATO played a major part in bringing Europeans together and in keeping the peace. We must all remember that.

I want to pick up on the comments that Irene Oldfather made. I sympathise with her having a cold, but I suspect that in tramping around Europe she has picked up some European germs. I ask her to keep them to herself, but not her European thoughts, because some of her thoughts are very relevant indeed.

Remembering that the debate centred on the convention, Irene Oldfather acknowledged that the convention has been a disappointment to her. The convention has been a disappointment to me as well, because it has concentrated too much on what I see as a drive towards federalism. The convention envisages a constitution that would bond all nations together in a way that suggests that, in the longer term, we would operate under a single European state. The convention should have been an opportunity to examine the real issues of Europe, which are the issues that bother the people in all our constituencies and areas.

Irene Oldfather: I appreciate Phil Gallie's sentiments, but I want to put on record the fact that the disappointment that we share about some aspects of the convention is probably for different reasons. If I may mention one aspect that I am particularly disappointed in—

Phil Gallie: Okay, I take the point. Whether or not Irene Oldfather's disappointment is for different reasons, she expressed some disappointment in the convention.

My disappointment centres on the fact that the convention has failed to focus on key issues, such as the way in which the Commission has managed its finances. Just a few years ago, the European Parliament dismissed the Commission for failing to manage European financial affairs correctly. We seem to be moving towards that scenario again. It surprises me that no one mentioned that in today's debate despite the fact that I am sure that every one of our constituents would feel strongly about it. We have talked about great visions for Europe, but when we come down to it, there are concerns about issues such as bureaucracy. The convention seems to have failed to address that and that is also disappointing.

Jim Wallace spoke about all the benefits of Europe, including the potential for more jobs. Let us be realistic. We are all for enlargement because it seems to make sense, but with that has to come reform. Until now, reforms have been too inadequate to meet the needs of enlargement. The convention could have addressed that issue and brought members together on it. The convention has missed many opportunities.

I am concerned that majority voting is being considered. That would be detrimental to the subsidiarity that has been the aim of the First Minister and the Deputy First Minister.

The convention should have addressed the kind of issues that I have mentioned. Instead, it has been guided by the Prodis and some of the other senior political figures in Europe who seem to see a federal Europe as the ultimate aim for us all.

16:46

Irene McGugan (North-East Scotland) (SNP): Many members have said that the convention is discussing reforms to the European Union and that it should be working to make the EU more efficient and to bring it closer to citizens. As a concept, the convention is broadly welcomed.

I suggest that one of the main purposes of the convention is to open up to all Europe's citizens and their representatives the process of reforming the EU. I suggest that the convention has a duty to all democratic institutions in the EU to clarify the role in the EU of nations and regions other than member states. Today's debate has reminded us of the importance of Europe in our lives and why it is so important that our voices are heard and that we are all involved.

The principle of subsidiarity, which has been mentioned many times, should mean that European decision making reaches right down to the localities where the decisions made will have an effect; it should ensure that those decisions are taken appropriately and locally. From what I have heard today, I suggest that subsidiarity has to be better defined, especially for countries such as Scotland where it is important that people understand the concept.

As a member of the Committee of the Regions, I am constantly reminded that regions come in all shapes and sizes. I sit as an MSP and can comment from a Scottish perspective; other members might refer to their, often small, council areas. However, the Committee of the Regions has made a contribution to the debate on the convention with two key points that are relevant to Scotland.

First, the Committee of the Regions supports the proposal to grant the regions a specific status in the treaty, in the same way that the status of national Parliaments is recognised. It also supports the proposal to detail the areas in which the regions are involved, their responsibilities and the practical arrangements and procedures governing their participation. The Committee of the Regions also recognises that the principle of subsidiarity must be incorporated at sub-national level because, in many member states, local authorities share administrative responsibility for EU-related matters.

Secondly, the Committee of the Regions reiterated its call for the Committee and those regions that have legislative powers to be granted the right to bring proceedings before the European Court of Justice where the subsidiarity principle is not respected. Will the Deputy First Minister explain the Scottish Executive's opposition to those two key proposals from the Committee of the Regions?

Scotland has a long tradition of good relations with the nations of Europe and the SNP whole-heartedly supports the constitutional development of the EU in a way that is favourable to democracy. We welcome enlargement, not least because, as others have said, it provides a context for peace, enhancement of prosperity, co-operation and the environment. Those are all very good things.

We also support a European constitution that will delimit the powers exercised at EU, member state and regional level. However, we have always argued that major constitutional change should be approved through referenda.

In the debate, we have considered, to an extent, how the Scottish Parliament fits in and what our role is. Of even more relevance is the question that we should be asking: what has changed for us with devolution? We say, "Not very much." I give an example in conclusion. More than half the applicant countries are the same size as, or smaller than, Scotland, but they will all have a guaranteed seat at the top table, with permanent representation on the Council of Ministers, the right to nominate a commissioner, and considerably more members of the European Parliament per head of population. They are, quite rightly, set to enjoy first-class status, while Scotland will not. That is the basis of our amendment.

16:50

Mr Jim Wallace: I welcome the opportunity to have this debate and to have heard the contributions of members from all parts of the chamber. As I indicated at the outset, we see the debate as an important part of developing the discussion in Scotland and as helping to inform the submission that the Executive will make to the future of Europe convention.

I thought that Ben Wallace was a bit churlish when, in an intervention, he said that the motion did not recognise the role that the Parliament and its European Committee had played. I went out of my way in my opening speech to pay tribute to the work of the European Committee, in relation both to its most recent report, which was published on Tuesday, and to the work that it did at the end of last year, the report on which we debated in February.

Ben Wallace: The minister's motion was lodged yesterday, and we lodged an amendment to it. We had no idea what he was going to say in his speech, but it is a fact that his motion did not acknowledge the cross-party parliamentary role of the committee.

Mr Jim Wallace: I regret giving way to enable Ben Wallace to make that fairly pointless intervention. I mentioned that role in my opening speech, but Ben Wallace's intervention came later. His amendment relates to what he claims is a

"failure to engage Scottish civil society".

That is churlish. We not only consulted the European Committee, we launched a wide-ranging consultation with Scottish civic society at many different levels. There was an opportunity for people to contribute. Ben Wallace says that the CBI collected some views, but that should not detract from the fact that we expressly went out and invited many large bodies, such as the CBI, to give us their views. The response may not have been as large as many people would have hoped for, but that underlines the need for the convention's work on trying to engage more people in the European debate.

I will address the next point to get it out of the way—I speak of the inevitable amendment from the SNP and the view that if Scotland had a seat at the top table, everything would be hunky-dory. We hear that view often, and I know that SNP members have to go through the motions of saying it. They get so obsessed with who is sitting at the table that they never give much thought to what is being said there. When we agree the common line with the United Kingdom, the most important point is that the person who represents Scottish interests has the clout of the United Kingdom at the table—they are not obsessing about the shape of the furniture.

A number of members talked about the importance of having a constitution for Europe. There was general support—except from the Conservatives—for a constitution. I say to John Young that I cannot accept that those who support a constitution for Europe fall into the same mould as the Romans, Napoleon and Hitler. I do not think that they sought to dominate Europe by way of a constitution; they sought other ways of achieving that.

John Young: Will the minister give way?

Mr Jim Wallace: I have been fairly generous with interventions.

Fiona Hyslop: Will the minister give way?

Mr Jim Wallace: Yes.

Fiona Hyslop: As the minister is addressing the issue of the constitution, can he advise whether the Executive supports holding a referendum on any constitution treaty? Can he explain why the Executive is opposed to direct access for this Parliament to the European Court of Justice?

Mr Jim Wallace: I will deal with the second question in due course. As far as a referendum is concerned, that would be a matter for the Westminster Parliament. We are giving the people of Scotland an opportunity to express their views on those matters; we could not have given them more opportunity than we have tried to encourage in recent months.

I will give way to John Young now. It was unfair of me not to do so earlier.

John Young: I am grateful to the minister. I simply made the point that the Romans, Napoleon and Hitler conquered vast areas of Europe and ruled by dictatorship. Of course, Europe today does not.

Mr Jim Wallace: I agree fundamentally with John Young. The important point about constitutions is that they are in place to restrain wilder excesses. Colin Campbell made the point well. What is important in our consideration of constitutions is that we must not be driven by the constitution itself. We need to work out the principles of what we want to establish and devise the constitution to fit the Europe and the principles that we want to put in place.

Winnie Ewing and Sarah Boyack mentioned openness at meetings of the Council of Ministers. As I indicated in my opening remarks, we would support that development and reform of those meetings.

A number of members referred quite properly to the importance of subsidiarity. Kenny MacAskill referred to it as the level of responsibility at which decisions are made. That is an important issue for a Parliament such as the Scottish Parliament. As I said earlier, 80 per cent of our devolved competencies have a European dimension. We have argued that we should consider creating a political mechanism to police subsidiarity and that we should do so before decisions are made. There is strong support for that suggestion. The basis for my reservation about the judicial route is that, by its very nature, appeals would be made after a decision had been made, and the judicial route tends to be pretty cumbersome. We need a political, rather than a judicial, approach, because a political approach is liable to proceed more speedily. However, I accept that the European Committee is absolutely right to set out that the two approaches are not mutually exclusive.

Before the SNP gets too carried away, I should point out that when Jack McConnell signed the Florence declaration, he said that measures within the declaration, such as calls for regional access to the European Court of Justice or guarantees of representation at the Council of Ministers, apply less to Scotland. He also said that he understood well why those issues were important to other members of the group.

The declaration demonstrates clearly the maturity and flexibility that exists within the group. That is to our credit and bodes well for the future. Jack McConnell's point is that, from our perspective, the need for the judicial approach is not as great as it is perceived to be by other countries and that we should focus our attention on establishing an ex ante method of political scrutiny.

I turn to the rights and responsibilities of sub-member state administrations. We highlighted the importance of framework decision making in respect of SMSAs. Perhaps that would not have dealt entirely with Jamie Stone's perennial cheese problem, but it might have helped when we were implementing European legislation. We recognise that Brussels cannot have a one-size-fits-all approach to Europe that applies equally to parts of Finland, Greece, Tuscany and Scotland. We believe that we need more framework decision making within which we can devise legislation that matches Scottish circumstances. Winnie Ewing mentioned the importance of early access to decision making, to which I also referred in my opening speech.

Phil Gallie said that with enlargement must come reform. That was the point that the leaders of the European Union had in mind when they established the convention. If the European Union of today is not engaging sufficiently well with its citizens, how much more difficult will it be for it to do so when we have a much greater population in the new, enlarged European Union? That is why the convention has a lot to live up to—

Phil Gallie: You have not done that.

Mr Jim Wallace: Phil Gallie can say that we have not done that, but the convention is still sitting, which means that it has not produced its final report. Much work remains to be done and an inter-governmental conference is still to come.

We should not lose sight of what has been achieved. Sarah Boyack said that some of the countries that are coming into the European Union had suffered conflict in the past two decades. We need only cast our minds back 20 years to remember that many of the applicant nations were under communist rule. If people had said then that within 20 years those nations would be embraced by the European Union, they would have thought that Europe would have travelled a long way. However, Europe has done so, which is why it is so important to get the structures of the European Union right. I have much pleasure in commending the motion to the Parliament.

Parliamentary Bureau Motions

17:00

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I invite Euan Robson to move motion S1M-3683, on the establishment of the committee for the National Galleries of Scotland Bill, and motion S1M-3685, on the establishment of a consolidation committee of the Parliament.

Motions moved,

That the Parliament agrees to establish a Committee of the Parliament as follows—

Name of Committee: National Galleries of Scotland Bill Committee
Remit: To consider the National Galleries of Scotland Bill
Duration: Until the Bill is passed, or falls or is otherwise no longer in progress
Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Labour Party and the Deputy Convener a member of the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party
Membership: Rhona Brankin, Maureen Macmillan, Alasdair Morgan, Margaret Smith and John Young.

That the Parliament agrees to establish a Consolidation Committee of the Parliament as follows—

Name of Committee: Salmon and Freshwater Fisheries (Consolidation) (Scotland) Bill Committee
Remit: To consider the Salmon and Freshwater Fisheries (Consolidation) (Scotland) Bill
Duration: Until the Bill is passed, or falls or is otherwise no longer in progress
Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party and the Deputy Convener a member of the Labour Party
Membership: Brian Fitzpatrick, Murdo Fraser, Duncan Hamilton, Gordon Jackson and John Farquhar Munro.—[Euan Robson.]

Decision Time

17:00

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): There are nine questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S1M-3410, in the name of Ms Margaret Curran, on the general principles of the Building (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.

Motion agreed to.

That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Building (Scotland) Bill.

The Presiding Officer: The second question is, that motion S1M-3456, in the name of Mr Andy Kerr, on the financial resolution in respect of that bill, be agreed to.

Motion agreed to.

That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Parliament resulting from the Building (Scotland) Bill, agrees to—

(a) any increase in expenditure payable out of the Scottish Consolidated Fund in consequence of the Act, and

(b) any charge imposed, and any payment required to be made, by or under the Act.

The Presiding Officer: The third question is, that motion S1M-3671, in the name of Mr Jim Wallace, on the Criminal Justice Bill, which is UK legislation, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

Members: No.

The Presiding Officer: There will be a division.

FOR

Aitken, Bill (Glasgow) (Con)
Baillie, Jackie (Dumbarton) (Lab)
Barrie, Scott (Dunfermline West) (Lab)
Boyack, Sarah (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
Brankin, Rhona (Midlothian) (Lab)
Brown, Robert (Glasgow) (LD)
Butler, Bill (Glasgow Anniesland) (Lab)
Chisholm, Malcolm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab)
Craigie, Cathie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab)
Curran, Ms Margaret (Glasgow Baillieston) (Lab)
Douglas-Hamilton, Lord James (Lothians) (Con)
Eadie, Helen (Dunfermline East) (Lab)
Ferguson, Patricia (Glasgow Maryhill) (Lab)
Fergusson, Alex (South of Scotland) (Con)
Finnie, Ross (West of Scotland) (LD)
Fitzpatrick, Brian (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)
Fraser, Murdo (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Gallie, Phil (South of Scotland) (Con)
Goldie, Miss Annabel (West of Scotland) (Con)
Gorrie, Donald (Central Scotland) (LD)
Grant, Rhoda (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Gray, Iain (Edinburgh Pentlands) (Lab)
Harding, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Harper, Robin (Lothians) (Grn)
Henry, Hugh (Paisley South) (Lab)
Home Robertson, Mr John (East Lothian) (Lab)
Hughes, Janis (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab)
Jackson, Dr Sylvia (Stirling) (Lab)
Jackson, Gordon (Glasgow Govan) (Lab)
Jamieson, Cathy (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab)
Jamieson, Margaret (Kilmarnock and Loudoun) (Lab)
Jenkins, Ian (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD)
Johnstone, Alex (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Kerr, Mr Andy (East Kilbride) (Lab)
Lamont, Johann (Glasgow Pollok) (Lab)
Livingstone, Marilyn (Kirkcaldy) (Lab)
Lyon, George (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
Macintosh, Mr Kenneth (Eastwood) (Lab)
MacKay, Angus (Edinburgh South) (Lab)
Macmillan, Maureen (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Martin, Paul (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab)
McAllion, Mr John (Dundee East) (Lab)
McAveety, Mr Frank (Glasgow Shettleston) (Lab)
McConnell, Mr Jack (Motherwell and Wishaw) (Lab)
McIntosh, Mrs Lyndsay (Central Scotland) (Con)
McLetchie, David (Lothians) (Con)
McMahon, Mr Michael (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab)
McNeil, Mr Duncan (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab)
McNeill, Pauline (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab)
McNulty, Des (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab)
Monteith, Mr Brian (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Morrison, Mr Alasdair (Western Isles) (Lab)
Muldoon, Bristow (Livingston) (Lab)
Mulligan, Mrs Mary (Linlithgow) (Lab)
Mundell, David (South of Scotland) (Con)
Munro, John Farquhar (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD)
Murray, Dr Elaine (Dumfries) (Lab)
Oldfather, Irene (Cunninghame South) (Lab)
Peacock, Peter (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Peattie, Cathy (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Radcliffe, Nora (Gordon) (LD)
Raffan, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (LD)
Robson, Euan (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD)
Scanlon, Mary (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Scott, John (Ayr) (Con)
Scott, Tavish (Shetland) (LD)
Simpson, Dr Richard (Ochil) (Lab)
Smith, Elaine (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab)
Smith, Iain (North-East Fife) (LD)
Smith, Mrs Margaret (Edinburgh West) (LD)
Stephen, Nicol (Aberdeen South) (LD)
Stone, Mr Jamie (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
Thomson, Elaine (Aberdeen North) (Lab)
Tosh, Mr Murray (South of Scotland) (Con)
Wallace, Ben (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Wallace, Mr Jim (Orkney) (LD)
Whitefield, Karen (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab)
Wilson, Allan (Cunninghame North) (Lab)
Young, John (West of Scotland) (Con)

AGAINST

Campbell, Colin (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Canavan, Dennis (Falkirk West)
Crawford, Bruce (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Cunningham, Roseanna (Perth) (SNP)
Ewing, Dr Winnie (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Ewing, Fergus (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP)
Fabiani, Linda (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Gibson, Mr Kenneth (Glasgow) (SNP)
Grahame, Christine (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Hamilton, Mr Duncan (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Hyslop, Fiona (Lothians) (SNP)
Ingram, Mr Adam (South of Scotland) (SNP)
MacAskill, Mr Kenny (Lothians) (SNP)
MacDonald, Ms Margo (Lothians) (SNP)
Marwick, Tricia (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Matheson, Michael (Central Scotland) (SNP)
McGugan, Irene (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
McLeod, Fiona (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Morgan, Alasdair (Galloway and Upper Nithsdale) (SNP)
Russell, Michael (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Sheridan, Tommy (Glasgow) (SSP)
Stevenson, Stewart (Banff and Buchan) (SNP)
Sturgeon, Nicola (Glasgow) (SNP)
Swinney, Mr John (North Tayside) (SNP)
Ullrich, Kay (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Welsh, Mr Andrew (Angus) (SNP)
Wilson, Andrew (Central Scotland) (SNP)

The Presiding Officer: The result of the division is: For 79, Against 27, Abstentions 0.

Motion agreed to.

That the Parliament agrees that the provisions in the Criminal Justice Bill that relate to devolved matters should be considered by the UK Parliament.

The Presiding Officer: The fourth question is, that motion S1M-3670, in the name of Mr Jim Wallace, on the Crime (International Co-operation) Bill, which is UK legislation, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

Members: No.

The Presiding Officer: There will be a division.

FOR

Aitken, Bill (Glasgow) (Con)
Baillie, Jackie (Dumbarton) (Lab)
Barrie, Scott (Dunfermline West) (Lab)
Boyack, Sarah (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
Brankin, Rhona (Midlothian) (Lab)
Brown, Robert (Glasgow) (LD)
Butler, Bill (Glasgow Anniesland) (Lab)
Chisholm, Malcolm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab)
Craigie, Cathie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab)
Curran, Ms Margaret (Glasgow Baillieston) (Lab)
Douglas-Hamilton, Lord James (Lothians) (Con)
Eadie, Helen (Dunfermline East) (Lab)
Ferguson, Patricia (Glasgow Maryhill) (Lab)
Fergusson, Alex (South of Scotland) (Con)
Finnie, Ross (West of Scotland) (LD)
Fitzpatrick, Brian (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)
Fraser, Murdo (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Gallie, Phil (South of Scotland) (Con)
Goldie, Miss Annabel (West of Scotland) (Con)
Gorrie, Donald (Central Scotland) (LD)
Grant, Rhoda (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Gray, Iain (Edinburgh Pentlands) (Lab)
Harding, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Harper, Robin (Lothians) (Grn)
Henry, Hugh (Paisley South) (Lab)
Home Robertson, Mr John (East Lothian) (Lab)
Hughes, Janis (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab)
Jackson, Dr Sylvia (Stirling) (Lab)
Jackson, Gordon (Glasgow Govan) (Lab)
Jamieson, Cathy (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab)
Jamieson, Margaret (Kilmarnock and Loudoun) (Lab)
Jenkins, Ian (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD)
Johnstone, Alex (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Kerr, Mr Andy (East Kilbride) (Lab)
Lamont, Johann (Glasgow Pollok) (Lab)
Livingstone, Marilyn (Kirkcaldy) (Lab)
Lyon, George (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
Macintosh, Mr Kenneth (Eastwood) (Lab)
MacKay, Angus (Edinburgh South) (Lab)
Macmillan, Maureen (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Martin, Paul (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab)
McAllion, Mr John (Dundee East) (Lab)
McAveety, Mr Frank (Glasgow Shettleston) (Lab)
McCabe, Mr Tom (Hamilton South) (Lab)
McConnell, Mr Jack (Motherwell and Wishaw) (Lab)
McIntosh, Mrs Lyndsay (Central Scotland) (Con)
McLetchie, David (Lothians) (Con)
McMahon, Mr Michael (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab)
McNeil, Mr Duncan (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab)
McNeill, Pauline (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab)
McNulty, Des (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab)
Monteith, Mr Brian (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Morrison, Mr Alasdair (Western Isles) (Lab)
Muldoon, Bristow (Livingston) (Lab)
Mulligan, Mrs Mary (Linlithgow) (Lab)
Mundell, David (South of Scotland) (Con)
Munro, John Farquhar (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD)
Murray, Dr Elaine (Dumfries) (Lab)
Oldfather, Irene (Cunninghame South) (Lab)
Peacock, Peter (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Peattie, Cathy (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Radcliffe, Nora (Gordon) (LD)
Raffan, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (LD)
Robson, Euan (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD)
Scanlon, Mary (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Scott, John (Ayr) (Con)
Scott, Tavish (Shetland) (LD)
Simpson, Dr Richard (Ochil) (Lab)
Smith, Elaine (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab)
Smith, Iain (North-East Fife) (LD)
Smith, Mrs Margaret (Edinburgh West) (LD)
Stephen, Nicol (Aberdeen South) (LD)
Stone, Mr Jamie (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
Thomson, Elaine (Aberdeen North) (Lab)
Tosh, Mr Murray (South of Scotland) (Con)
Wallace, Ben (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Wallace, Mr Jim (Orkney) (LD)
Whitefield, Karen (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab)
Wilson, Allan (Cunninghame North) (Lab)
Young, John (West of Scotland) (Con)

AGAINST

Campbell, Colin (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Canavan, Dennis (Falkirk West)
Crawford, Bruce (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Cunningham, Roseanna (Perth) (SNP)
Ewing, Dr Winnie (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Ewing, Fergus (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP)
Fabiani, Linda (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Gibson, Mr Kenneth (Glasgow) (SNP)
Grahame, Christine (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Hamilton, Mr Duncan (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Hyslop, Fiona (Lothians) (SNP)
Ingram, Mr Adam (South of Scotland) (SNP)
MacAskill, Mr Kenny (Lothians) (SNP)
MacDonald, Ms Margo (Lothians) (SNP)
Marwick, Tricia (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Matheson, Michael (Central Scotland) (SNP)
McGugan, Irene (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
McLeod, Fiona (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Morgan, Alasdair (Galloway and Upper Nithsdale) (SNP)
Russell, Michael (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Sheridan, Tommy (Glasgow) (SSP)
Stevenson, Stewart (Banff and Buchan) (SNP)
Sturgeon, Nicola (Glasgow) (SNP)
Swinney, Mr John (North Tayside) (SNP)
Ullrich, Kay (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Welsh, Mr Andrew (Angus) (SNP)
Wilson, Andrew (Central Scotland) (SNP)


The Presiding Officer: The result of the division is: For 80, Against 27, Abstentions 0.

Motion agreed to.

That the Parliament recognises the need for the United Kingdom to ensure compliance with the international obligations for which the Crime (International Co-operation) Bill makes provision and agrees that those provisions in the bill that relate to devolved matters should be considered by the UK Parliament.

The Presiding Officer: The fifth question is, that amendment S1M-3678.1, in the name of Richard Lochhead, which seeks to amend motion S1M-3678, in the name of Mr Jim Wallace, on the future of Europe convention—the Scottish dimension, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

Members: No.

The Presiding Officer: There will be a division.

FOR

Campbell, Colin (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Canavan, Dennis (Falkirk West)
Crawford, Bruce (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Cunningham, Roseanna (Perth) (SNP)
Ewing, Dr Winnie (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Ewing, Fergus (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP)
Fabiani, Linda (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Gibson, Mr Kenneth (Glasgow) (SNP)
Grahame, Christine (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Hamilton, Mr Duncan (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Hyslop, Fiona (Lothians) (SNP)
Ingram, Mr Adam (South of Scotland) (SNP)
MacAskill, Mr Kenny (Lothians) (SNP)
MacDonald, Ms Margo (Lothians) (SNP)
Marwick, Tricia (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Matheson, Michael (Central Scotland) (SNP)
McGugan, Irene (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
McLeod, Fiona (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Morgan, Alasdair (Galloway and Upper Nithsdale) (SNP)
Russell, Michael (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Sheridan, Tommy (Glasgow) (SSP)
Stevenson, Stewart (Banff and Buchan) (SNP)
Sturgeon, Nicola (Glasgow) (SNP)
Swinney, Mr John (North Tayside) (SNP)
Ullrich, Kay (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Welsh, Mr Andrew (Angus) (SNP)
Wilson, Andrew (Central Scotland) (SNP)

AGAINST

Aitken, Bill (Glasgow) (Con)
Baillie, Jackie (Dumbarton) (Lab)
Barrie, Scott (Dunfermline West) (Lab)
Boyack, Sarah (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
Brankin, Rhona (Midlothian) (Lab)
Brown, Robert (Glasgow) (LD)
Butler, Bill (Glasgow Anniesland) (Lab)
Chisholm, Malcolm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab)
Craigie, Cathie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab)
Curran, Ms Margaret (Glasgow Baillieston) (Lab)
Douglas-Hamilton, Lord James (Lothians) (Con)
Eadie, Helen (Dunfermline East) (Lab)
Ferguson, Patricia (Glasgow Maryhill) (Lab)
Fergusson, Alex (South of Scotland) (Con)
Finnie, Ross (West of Scotland) (LD)
Fitzpatrick, Brian (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)
Fraser, Murdo (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Gallie, Phil (South of Scotland) (Con)
Gillon, Karen (Clydesdale) (Lab)
Goldie, Miss Annabel (West of Scotland) (Con)
Gorrie, Donald (Central Scotland) (LD)
Grant, Rhoda (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Gray, Iain (Edinburgh Pentlands) (Lab)
Harding, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Henry, Hugh (Paisley South) (Lab)
Home Robertson, Mr John (East Lothian) (Lab)
Hughes, Janis (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab)
Jackson, Dr Sylvia (Stirling) (Lab)
Jackson, Gordon (Glasgow Govan) (Lab)
Jamieson, Cathy (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab)
Jamieson, Margaret (Kilmarnock and Loudoun) (Lab)
Jenkins, Ian (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD)
Johnstone, Alex (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Kerr, Mr Andy (East Kilbride) (Lab)
Lamont, Johann (Glasgow Pollok) (Lab)
Livingstone, Marilyn (Kirkcaldy) (Lab)
Lyon, George (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
Macintosh, Mr Kenneth (Eastwood) (Lab)
MacKay, Angus (Edinburgh South) (Lab)
Macmillan, Maureen (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Martin, Paul (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab)
McAllion, Mr John (Dundee East) (Lab)
McAveety, Mr Frank (Glasgow Shettleston) (Lab)
McCabe, Mr Tom (Hamilton South) (Lab)
McConnell, Mr Jack (Motherwell and Wishaw) (Lab)
McIntosh, Mrs Lyndsay (Central Scotland) (Con)
McLetchie, David (Lothians) (Con)
McMahon, Mr Michael (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab)
McNeil, Mr Duncan (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab)
McNeill, Pauline (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab)
McNulty, Des (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab)
Monteith, Mr Brian (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Morrison, Mr Alasdair (Western Isles) (Lab)
Muldoon, Bristow (Livingston) (Lab)
Mulligan, Mrs Mary (Linlithgow) (Lab)
Mundell, David (South of Scotland) (Con)
Munro, John Farquhar (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD)
Murray, Dr Elaine (Dumfries) (Lab)
Oldfather, Irene (Cunninghame South) (Lab)
Peacock, Peter (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Peattie, Cathy (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Radcliffe, Nora (Gordon) (LD)
Raffan, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (LD)
Robson, Euan (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD)
Scanlon, Mary (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Scott, John (Ayr) (Con)
Scott, Tavish (Shetland) (LD)
Simpson, Dr Richard (Ochil) (Lab)
Smith, Elaine (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab)
Smith, Iain (North-East Fife) (LD)
Smith, Mrs Margaret (Edinburgh West) (LD)
Stephen, Nicol (Aberdeen South) (LD)
Stone, Mr Jamie (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
Thomson, Elaine (Aberdeen North) (Lab)
Tosh, Mr Murray (South of Scotland) (Con)
Wallace, Ben (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Wallace, Mr Jim (Orkney) (LD)
Whitefield, Karen (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab)
Wilson, Allan (Cunninghame North) (Lab)
Young, John (West of Scotland) (Con)

ABSTENTIONS

Harper, Robin (Lothians) (Grn)

The Presiding Officer: The result of the division is: For 27, Against 80, Abstentions 1.

Amendment disagreed to.

The Presiding Officer: The sixth question is, that amendment S1M-3678.2, in the name of Ben Wallace, which seeks to amend motion S1M-3678, in the name of Mr Jim Wallace, on the future of Europe convention—the Scottish dimension, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

Members: No.

The Presiding Officer: There will be a division

FOR

Aitken, Bill (Glasgow) (Con)
Douglas-Hamilton, Lord James (Lothians) (Con)
Fergusson, Alex (South of Scotland) (Con)
Fraser, Murdo (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Gallie, Phil (South of Scotland) (Con)
Goldie, Miss Annabel (West of Scotland) (Con)
Harding, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Johnstone, Alex (North-East Scotland) (Con)
McIntosh, Mrs Lyndsay (Central Scotland) (Con)
McLetchie, David (Lothians) (Con)
Monteith, Mr Brian (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Mundell, David (South of Scotland) (Con)
Scanlon, Mary (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Scott, John (Ayr) (Con)
Tosh, Mr Murray (South of Scotland) (Con)
Wallace, Ben (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Young, John (West of Scotland) (Con)

AGAINST

Baillie, Jackie (Dumbarton) (Lab)
Barrie, Scott (Dunfermline West) (Lab)
Boyack, Sarah (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
Brankin, Rhona (Midlothian) (Lab)
Brown, Robert (Glasgow) (LD)
Butler, Bill (Glasgow Anniesland) (Lab)
Canavan, Dennis (Falkirk West)
Chisholm, Malcolm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab)
Craigie, Cathie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab)
Curran, Ms Margaret (Glasgow Baillieston) (Lab)
Eadie, Helen (Dunfermline East) (Lab)
Ewing, Dr Winnie (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Ewing, Fergus (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP)
Ferguson, Patricia (Glasgow Maryhill) (Lab)
Finnie, Ross (West of Scotland) (LD)
Fitzpatrick, Brian (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)
Gillon, Karen (Clydesdale) (Lab)
Gorrie, Donald (Central Scotland) (LD)
Grant, Rhoda (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Gray, Iain (Edinburgh Pentlands) (Lab)
Harper, Robin (Lothians) (Grn)
Henry, Hugh (Paisley South) (Lab)
Home Robertson, Mr John (East Lothian) (Lab)
Hughes, Janis (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab)
Jackson, Dr Sylvia (Stirling) (Lab)
Jackson, Gordon (Glasgow Govan) (Lab)
Jamieson, Cathy (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab)
Jamieson, Margaret (Kilmarnock and Loudoun) (Lab)
Jenkins, Ian (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD)
Kerr, Mr Andy (East Kilbride) (Lab)
Lamont, Johann (Glasgow Pollok) (Lab)
Livingstone, Marilyn (Kirkcaldy) (Lab)
Lyon, George (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
Macintosh, Mr Kenneth (Eastwood) (Lab)
MacKay, Angus (Edinburgh South) (Lab)
Macmillan, Maureen (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Martin, Paul (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab)
McAllion, Mr John (Dundee East) (Lab)
McAveety, Mr Frank (Glasgow Shettleston) (Lab)
McCabe, Mr Tom (Hamilton South) (Lab)
McConnell, Mr Jack (Motherwell and Wishaw) (Lab)
McMahon, Mr Michael (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab)
McNeil, Mr Duncan (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab)
McNeill, Pauline (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab)
McNulty, Des (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab)
Morrison, Mr Alasdair (Western Isles) (Lab)
Muldoon, Bristow (Livingston) (Lab)
Mulligan, Mrs Mary (Linlithgow) (Lab)
Munro, John Farquhar (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD)
Murray, Dr Elaine (Dumfries) (Lab)
Oldfather, Irene (Cunninghame South) (Lab)
Peacock, Peter (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Peattie, Cathy (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Radcliffe, Nora (Gordon) (LD)
Raffan, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (LD)
Robson, Euan (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD)
Scott, Tavish (Shetland) (LD)
Sheridan, Tommy (Glasgow) (SSP)
Simpson, Dr Richard (Ochil) (Lab)
Smith, Elaine (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab)
Smith, Iain (North-East Fife) (LD)
Smith, Mrs Margaret (Edinburgh West) (LD)
Stephen, Nicol (Aberdeen South) (LD)
Stone, Mr Jamie (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
Thomson, Elaine (Aberdeen North) (Lab)
Wallace, Mr Jim (Orkney) (LD)
Welsh, Mr Andrew (Angus) (SNP)
Whitefield, Karen (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab)
Wilson, Allan (Cunninghame North) (Lab)

ABSTENTIONS

Campbell, Colin (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Crawford, Bruce (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Cunningham, Roseanna (Perth) (SNP)
Fabiani, Linda (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Gibson, Mr Kenneth (Glasgow) (SNP)
Grahame, Christine (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Hamilton, Mr Duncan (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Hyslop, Fiona (Lothians) (SNP)
Ingram, Mr Adam (South of Scotland) (SNP)
MacAskill, Mr Kenny (Lothians) (SNP)
MacDonald, Ms Margo (Lothians) (SNP)
Marwick, Tricia (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Matheson, Michael (Central Scotland) (SNP)
McGugan, Irene (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
McLeod, Fiona (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Morgan, Alasdair (Galloway and Upper Nithsdale) (SNP)
Reid, Mr George (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Russell, Michael (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Stevenson, Stewart (Banff and Buchan) (SNP)
Sturgeon, Nicola (Glasgow) (SNP)
Swinney, Mr John (North Tayside) (SNP)
Ullrich, Kay (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Wilson, Andrew (Central Scotland) (SNP)

The Presiding Officer: The result of the division is: For 17, Against 69, Abstentions 23.

Amendment disagreed to.

The Presiding Officer: The next question is, that motion S1M-3678, in the name of Mr Jim Wallace, on the future of Europe convention—the Scottish dimension, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

Members: No.

The Presiding Officer: There will be a division.

FOR

Baillie, Jackie (Dumbarton) (Lab)
Barrie, Scott (Dunfermline West) (Lab)
Boyack, Sarah (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
Brankin, Rhona (Midlothian) (Lab)
Brown, Robert (Glasgow) (LD)
Butler, Bill (Glasgow Anniesland) (Lab)
Canavan, Dennis (Falkirk West)
Chisholm, Malcolm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab)
Craigie, Cathie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab)
Curran, Ms Margaret (Glasgow Baillieston) (Lab)
Eadie, Helen (Dunfermline East) (Lab)
Ferguson, Patricia (Glasgow Maryhill) (Lab)
Finnie, Ross (West of Scotland) (LD)
Fitzpatrick, Brian (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)
Gillon, Karen (Clydesdale) (Lab)
Gorrie, Donald (Central Scotland) (LD)
Grant, Rhoda (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Gray, Iain (Edinburgh Pentlands) (Lab)
Henry, Hugh (Paisley South) (Lab)
Home Robertson, Mr John (East Lothian) (Lab)
Hughes, Janis (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab)
Jackson, Dr Sylvia (Stirling) (Lab)
Jackson, Gordon (Glasgow Govan) (Lab)
Jamieson, Cathy (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab)
Jamieson, Margaret (Kilmarnock and Loudoun) (Lab)
Jenkins, Ian (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD)
Kerr, Mr Andy (East Kilbride) (Lab)
Lamont, Johann (Glasgow Pollok) (Lab)
Livingstone, Marilyn (Kirkcaldy) (Lab)
Lyon, George (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
Macintosh, Mr Kenneth (Eastwood) (Lab)
MacKay, Angus (Edinburgh South) (Lab)
Macmillan, Maureen (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Martin, Paul (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab)
McAllion, Mr John (Dundee East) (Lab)
McAveety, Mr Frank (Glasgow Shettleston) (Lab)
McCabe, Mr Tom (Hamilton South) (Lab)
McConnell, Mr Jack (Motherwell and Wishaw) (Lab)
McMahon, Mr Michael (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab)
McNeil, Mr Duncan (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab)
McNeill, Pauline (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab)
McNulty, Des (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab)
Morrison, Mr Alasdair (Western Isles) (Lab)
Muldoon, Bristow (Livingston) (Lab)
Mulligan, Mrs Mary (Linlithgow) (Lab)
Munro, John Farquhar (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD)
Murray, Dr Elaine (Dumfries) (Lab)
Oldfather, Irene (Cunninghame South) (Lab)
Peacock, Peter (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Peattie, Cathy (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Radcliffe, Nora (Gordon) (LD)
Raffan, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (LD)
Robson, Euan (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD)
Scott, Tavish (Shetland) (LD)
Simpson, Dr Richard (Ochil) (Lab)
Smith, Elaine (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab)
Smith, Iain (North-East Fife) (LD)
Smith, Mrs Margaret (Edinburgh West) (LD)
Stephen, Nicol (Aberdeen South) (LD)
Stone, Mr Jamie (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
Thomson, Elaine (Aberdeen North) (Lab)
Wallace, Mr Jim (Orkney) (LD)
Whitefield, Karen (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab)
Wilson, Allan (Cunninghame North) (Lab)

AGAINST

Aitken, Bill (Glasgow) (Con)
Douglas-Hamilton, Lord James (Lothians) (Con)
Ewing, Dr Winnie (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Fergusson, Alex (South of Scotland) (Con)
Fraser, Murdo (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Gallie, Phil (South of Scotland) (Con)
Goldie, Miss Annabel (West of Scotland) (Con)
Harding, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Johnstone, Alex (North-East Scotland) (Con)
McIntosh, Mrs Lyndsay (Central Scotland) (Con)
McLetchie, David (Lothians) (Con)
Monteith, Mr Brian (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Mundell, David (South of Scotland) (Con)
Scanlon, Mary (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Scott, John (Ayr) (Con)
Tosh, Mr Murray (South of Scotland) (Con)
Wallace, Ben (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Welsh, Mr Andrew (Angus) (SNP)
Young, John (West of Scotland) (Con)

ABSTENTIONS

Campbell, Colin (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Crawford, Bruce (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Cunningham, Roseanna (Perth) (SNP)
Ewing, Fergus (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP)
Fabiani, Linda (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Gibson, Mr Kenneth (Glasgow) (SNP)
Grahame, Christine (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Hamilton, Mr Duncan (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Harper, Robin (Lothians) (Grn)
Hyslop, Fiona (Lothians) (SNP)
Ingram, Mr Adam (South of Scotland) (SNP)
MacAskill, Mr Kenny (Lothians) (SNP)
MacDonald, Ms Margo (Lothians) (SNP)
Marwick, Tricia (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Matheson, Michael (Central Scotland) (SNP)
McGugan, Irene (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
McLeod, Fiona (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Morgan, Alasdair (Galloway and Upper Nithsdale) (SNP)
Reid, Mr George (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Russell, Michael (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Sheridan, Tommy (Glasgow) (SSP)
Stevenson, Stewart (Banff and Buchan) (SNP)
Sturgeon, Nicola (Glasgow) (SNP)
Swinney, Mr John (North Tayside) (SNP)
Ullrich, Kay (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Wilson, Andrew (Central Scotland) (SNP)

The Presiding Officer: The result of the division is: For 64, Against 19, Abstentions 26.

Motion agreed to.

That the Parliament acknowledges the many benefits that the European Union has delivered for Europe and for Scotland, welcomes the establishment of the Convention on the Future of Europe as an open and innovative means of addressing the issues now facing the European Union; believes that, in light of experience, the European Union needs to become more effective, efficient, easier to understand, democratic, transparent and accountable; recognises the role that Sub-Member State Administrations can play in realising these objectives; welcomes the Scottish Executive's engagement with Scottish civil society to stimulate discussion and to seek views on the Future of Europe; welcomes the contribution that the Executive has made to the debate so far, and calls on the Executive to press the Convention to bring forward proposals for strengthening the profile of the Subsidiarity Principle in the EU treaties, adopting a new mechanism for enforcing it which allows for full Sub-Member State Administration involvement, making greater use of framework legislation, consulting Sub-Member State Administrations at an early stage of policy development, generating greater transparency in European decision-making and introducing financial impact assessments for legislative proposals.

The Presiding Officer: The next question is, that motion S1M-3683, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, on the establishment of a National Galleries of Scotland Bill committee, be agreed to.

Motion agreed to.

That the Parliament agrees to establish a Committee of the Parliament as follows—

Name of Committee: National Galleries of Scotland Bill Committee
Remit: To consider the National Galleries of Scotland Bill
Duration: Until the Bill is passed, or falls or is otherwise no longer in progress
Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Labour Party and the Deputy Convener a member of the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party
Membership: Rhona Brankin, Maureen Macmillan, Alasdair Morgan, Margaret Smith and John Young.

The Presiding Officer: The final question is, that motion S1M-3685, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, on the establishment of a Salmon and Freshwater Fisheries (Consolidation) (Scotland) Bill committee, be agreed to.

Motion agreed to.

That the Parliament agrees to establish a Consolidation Committee of the Parliament as follows—

Name of Committee: Salmon and Freshwater Fisheries (Consolidation) (Scotland) Bill Committee
Remit: To consider the Salmon and Freshwater Fisheries (Consolidation) (Scotland) Bill
Duration: Until the Bill is passed, or falls or is otherwise no longer in progress
Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party and the Deputy Convener a member of the Labour Party
Membership: Brian Fitzpatrick, Murdo Fraser, Duncan Hamilton, Gordon Jackson and John Farquhar Munro.

The Presiding Officer: That concludes decision time.

Osteoporosis

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Mr Murray Tosh): The final item of business is a members' business debate on motion S1M-3508, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on osteoporosis. The debate will be concluded without any question being put.

Motion debated,

That the Parliament notes that osteoporosis is a major public health problem which results in more than 20,000 fractures a year in Scotland, that the cost of osteoporotic fractures in the United Kingdom each year is estimated at over £1.7 billion and that one third of women and one in 12 men over 50 will suffer an osteoporotic fracture; further notes that with an ageing population profile this problem will become even more serious; is aware that osteoporosis is both treatable and largely preventable; welcomes the fact that the public and health professionals are becoming increasingly aware of osteoporosis as a major health problem but is concerned that health service provision throughout Scotland is patchy and that access to diagnostic testing and monitoring varies around the country; believes that sufficient funding can be made available so that all patients have equal access to services for both the diagnosis and treatment of osteoporosis and that all patients suffering a fragility fracture or having other risk factors for the disease should be assessed for the presence of osteoporosis, and further believes that public health campaigns should be promoting the importance of lifestyle factors as influencing bone health and preventing osteoporosis.

17:08

Fergus Ewing (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP): I am grateful to the Parliamentary Bureau for the opportunity to debate the issue of osteoporosis for the first time in the Scottish Parliament. Osteoporosis is one of the most widespread and pernicious diseases and affects more people than virtually any other serious disease or condition that we know of.

Osteoporosis, which is also known as fragile bones disease, affects men and women. One in three women and one in 12 men over the age of 50 will suffer from an osteoporotic fracture. The disease is a major cause of pain and disability and, in extreme cases, can cause death. The most common fractures that result from osteoporosis are fractures of the wrist, spine and hip. As the population of Scotland is ageing, the number of people who suffer from osteoporosis will continue to rise and the number of people who are at risk of fractures that are caused by osteoporosis is set to rise.

There is a huge financial cost in social care and in the acute costs of treating osteoporotic fractures. That cost is estimated at £1,700 million a year in the UK and £150 million in Scotland. There are huge costs to the national health service and social services. More than one fifth of all orthopaedic beds are used by patients who have had hip fractures. The acute care cost for each hip fracture patient is around £5,000, and there are approximately 6,000 hip fractures each year in Scotland. More than half of patients who have a hip fracture are unable to live on their own or to sustain independent living as a result. That of course means that some may require residential or other care, which imposes a huge cost.

Behind those dry statistics, chilling though they are, lies the real issue that I want to talk about, which is the human cost—the hundreds of thousands of tales of misery and pain of the people who have the disease. The pain that is suffered, patients' great anxieties about what the future holds and the misery that the disease can create should not be under-exaggerated.

It is essential that we have a better understanding of the disease in Scotland. I pay tribute to the work of the National Osteoporosis Society, which is represented in the gallery, and in particular to Anne Simpson, who is well known to many of us as she has made us more aware of the problems of osteoporosis.

The NOS, which operates throughout Scotland and the UK, holds open meetings to spread awareness of osteoporosis and does a great deal of excellent work in the general promotion of good bone health. Fifteen local support groups have been established in Scotland and play a huge part in passing on information and supporting sufferers, often on a one-to-one basis; I saw that at first hand when I recently attended the annual general meeting of the Inverness osteoporosis support group. The groups provide succour to families and are a series of excellent ginger groups, the members of which—perhaps from their own or their family's experience—are well able to put pressure on local health boards and professional staff to improve services in their area.

What would each of us do if we were told tomorrow that we had osteoporosis? What would be in our thoughts? Who would we turn to? How would we look towards the future? Perhaps we would be extremely anxious. We would not know what the future would hold, how serious the condition would become and how quickly symptoms would develop. We would ask obvious questions such as, will the treatment work? Can I play golf? Can I bowl? Can I do the garden? If I do those things, will I risk breaking a bone?

The NOS, drawing on the experience of members of the support groups, has produced an excellent strategy document called "Reducing fractures and osteoporosis in Scotland".

Where do we go from here and what needs to be done? Four issues need to be addressed. The first of those is a positive move—the impending introduction of the new Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network, or SIGN, guidelines, which will be published in spring 2003. Those guidelines will set out best practice for general practitioners and other health professionals and hospital clinicians on the way in which osteoporosis is diagnosed and treated and how patients who are most at risk can be identified. Obviously, those who are most at risk include women with early menopause, those who take steroids and those who have a poor diet. The publication of the guidelines will raise awareness among professionals of best practice. The NOS has ensured that the guidelines fully reflect the patient's perspective. I urge the minister to ensure that the guidelines are implemented throughout Scotland. When the minister responds to the debate, I ask him, first, to indicate whether that will happen.

Secondly, although the disease does not have a cure, it can be prevented and treated. To do that we should adopt a cradle-to-grave approach. We must target young people with the message of healthy bones. Surveys indicate that youngsters are not taking to heart any of the messages, which are extremely important. Free school milk for kids may seem like a costly policy, but in the long term it would provide a massive saving in human and financial terms. We must persuade kids that milk is not only good, it is cool, it tastes good, it makes them feel good, and it might even make them look good.

Thirdly, it is essential that dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry—DEXA—scanners are made more widely available in Scotland. Much work has been done, notably in the Highlands, where a DEXA scanner was obtained largely as a result of the work of Lorna Young, who has harried, badgered and lobbied on that issue for years. However, many people in Scotland do not have access to a DEXA scanner, which is a fatal defect.

Fourthly, we must educate health professionals. I acknowledge that the Health Education Board for Scotland and the health department have done a lot of work, but much more needs to be done.

The Presiding Officer is giving me that certain look, so I will draw my remarks to a close. I look forward to other members' speeches. I am proud that we are having the debate. I hope that the minister will tell us whether a strategy will be prepared for Scotland and to what extent health boards will be invited to implement the guidelines and ensure that DEXA scanners are available to everyone. We have an opportunity to explode the myth that nothing can be done about osteoporosis, which is the exact opposite of the truth. I hope that the debate will play a part in showing that there is a will across all the political parties to find the way ahead.

17:16

Maureen Macmillan (Highlands and Islands) (Lab): I will not be able to stay until the end of the debate because I hope to catch the early evening train to Inverness, so I apologise to the Presiding Officer and to members.

I thank Fergus Ewing for securing the debate. When I attended the presentation that the National Osteoporosis Society gave a couple of weeks ago, I knew nothing about osteoporosis, except that it made people's bones crumble, that old folks got it and that not very much could be done about it. How wrong I was. I am grateful to the society and the members of the area groups who came to Edinburgh to speak to us about the condition. I now have an understanding—albeit a basic one—of a condition that is debilitating for many people, but which is preventable and treatable. However, treatment and diagnosis are not available throughout the country. As Fergus Ewing said, we are lucky in the Highlands because there is a DEXA scanner in Dingwall, but not every part of the country is so lucky.

Awareness of the condition is important. We must educate people to protect their bones. Fergus Ewing's point about diet is crucial. It is a sad fact that even if one puts milk in front of children nowadays, some will not drink it because they want a fizzy drink instead. We must take account of the fact that people's unhealthy eating habits will prove disastrous in the future.

It would be expensive to install DEXA scanners throughout the country, but they would save the great deal of money that the national health service spends on people who have a grave form of osteoporosis. We must also take into account the misery and uncertainty of people who suffer from osteoporosis and the uncertainty of their families. I now realise that osteoporosis is not something that only elderly people have and that people who are much younger can get the condition.

It is important that there is proper diagnosis and treatment for osteoporosis and education from an early age to try to get children to drink milk and to take exercise, for example by walking to school. I ask the minister to consider the matter as a whole and to find out whether by spending a comparatively small amount of money now we could save a lot of money in the future and help people who otherwise would have miserable lives.

17:20

Michael Matheson (Central Scotland) (SNP): I congratulate my colleague Fergus Ewing on securing the debate. I know that this is a subject in which he has been interested for some time. He has pursued it diligently by the various parliamentary routes, which have culminated in today's debate.

Fergus Ewing has presented the facts of osteoporosis in our society. One in three women and one in 12 men can expect to suffer from osteoporosis. The commonly held view is that osteoporosis is an illness of the old. However, the National Osteoporosis Society's booklet tells the story of Anna Richmond, a 15-year-old girl who suffered from anorexia. After a four-year battle with that condition, she found herself suffering from osteoporosis. She had lost some 2in in height before she had even reached the age of 20. That illustrates the fact that young people can also suffer from this condition, which can be very debilitating for them. For Anna, things got better following effective treatment and she has gone on to become a doctor. She now works closely with the National Osteoporosis Society, which shows that, with effective treatment, people who suffer from the condition can lead an almost normal life.

Fergus Ewing said that the condition cannot be cured, but it can be prevented. It can also be treated, but I shall focus on prevention. We should, where possible, ensure that future generations are taught about the potential dangers of osteoporosis if they fail to have a suitable diet and to take adequate exercise. I agree with the arguments for providing free milk in schools. I always enjoyed my free milk when I was at school. Winnie Ewing has also pointed out to me that fish is very good for the bones. However, I do not want to encroach on that territory in case Stewart Stevenson intends to cover it later in the debate. It is important that young people have the opportunity to have a healthy diet to head off the potential development of osteoporosis in later life.

Sport also plays an important role in ensuring that young people develop healthy bones through regular physical exercise. We know from the statistics that fewer of our young people—especially young women—are participating in sporting activities. We are already seeing the warning signs of that in increasing levels of juvenile diabetes and obesity among young people. If we do not ensure that young people have a healthy diet and participate more in physical activities, the possibility of their developing osteoporosis in later life will be much greater.

Fergus Ewing mentioned the potential impact on our health service. It is essential that the services that are available for those who suffer from osteoporosis are the best that they can receive. Those people should have ready access to the necessary medical treatment and the diagnostic procedures that they have to undergo if they are considered to be possibly suffering from the condition. Alongside that, there must be regular monitoring of those who have been diagnosed as having osteoporosis, where possible, to ensure that their condition is being kept in check. The only way to achieve that is for GPs to be aware of the condition, and the SIGN guidelines will help to address that. We must also ensure that the acute hospitals sector has the resources to provide the continuing monitoring that is required.

I hope that, in his closing remarks, the minister will be able to take a broader approach to the issue, rather than a purely medical approach, and address ways in which we can improve the health of our young people to head off the problem in the future.

17:24

Mary Scanlon (Highlands and Islands) (Con): I thank Fergus Ewing for giving me the opportunity to speak on this subject. Fergus raises this issue persistently every time that MSPs from different parties meet the health chiefs in the Highlands. He does not always get the answers that he wants, but that does not stop him from raising the issue of osteoporosis as regular as clockwork.

I, too, would like to commend the National Osteoporosis Society on its strategy document "Reducing fractures and osteoporosis in Scotland: A strategy for Health Boards, Local Health Care Co-operatives, Acute and Primary Care Trusts", which was published in November 2000. I was heartened by the comment on the inside page from the chief medical officer for Scotland, who states:

"I hope that Local Health Care Co-operatives and Health Boards, Primary Care and Acute Trusts make its implementation a priority as part of their work in reducing osteoporotic fractures."

The strategy is also commendable because it is based on the principles of prevention and investment to save costs in the long run. Too often, we only consider issues such as how to cure fractures, but if we spent more money on prevention—which is at the heart of Fergus Ewing's motion—we would save money in the long run. The £150 million cost of osteoporosis to the NHS in Scotland cannot possibly measure an individual's loss of independence or the impact of bedblocking—or delayed discharge, as we call it. The most recent figure for that was 2,920 in July 2002, which represents a spending of millions of pounds.

Given that osteoporosis is treatable and preventable, any investment will undoubtedly save the NHS millions in the long run. I was shocked when I read the figures to find that only 50 per cent of osteoporosis patients return to full, independent living. The 50 per cent who do not do so represent an enormous amount of patients.

The SIGN guidelines are due in spring 2003 and will be welcome. I hope that they will be based on the NOS's strategy. All SIGN guidelines are welcome, but only if they are adhered to. If they gather dust on a shelf, they are of no great benefit. However, I am pleased to see that pharmacists are included as one of the agencies in the NOS's strategy. The strategy document states that pharmacists should

"encourage adherence to pharmacological treatment"

and

"ensure patients understand their medication and adhere to dosage."

I raise that matter in relation to a fact about which I got confused, which is that calcium is recommended to reduce vertebral fracture risk, but only if it is combined with vitamin D.

When one gets to a certain age in life and is considering how to avoid osteoporosis, one might read the following statement from the NOS's booklet: "Osteoporosis: Causes, prevention and treatment":

"There are some risks associated with HRT,"—

which is of course a common means of preventing and treating osteoporosis—

"such as a slight increase in both the risk of breast cancer (after five years of HRT use) and the risk of a blood clot (deep vein thrombosis)."

That is a wee bit confusing. I welcome the fact that pharmacists are included in the NOS's strategy. One might consider hormone replacement therapy as a means of preventing osteoporosis, but that would have to be measured against the risks that the booklet outlines.

As Michael Matheson said, much more can be achieved by health professionals working together to address osteoporosis. I also hope that the SIGN guidelines will give clear, unambiguous guidance because I found that the guidance is certainly not crystal clear. I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in the debate. I hope that the underlying principle of prevention will be adhered to for osteoporosis and many other conditions.

17:29

Stewart Stevenson (Banff and Buchan) (SNP): I am happy to come along and support Fergus Ewing's motion and to take part in what I expect to be a consensual debate. I think that some of us at least will be old enough to remember children with rickets and the large number of older ladies in particular who were stooped and crippled in old age because of undetected and untreated fractures, among other causes.

I mention rickets in particular because it has all but been eliminated in our young. However, there is some re-emergence of it because of dietary problems that are not the result of a lack of money, but of the spending of it in the wrong way on the wrong diet.

I well remember, in the immediate post-war period, going to the Ministry of Health office to collect my orange juice and cod-liver oil. As Michael Matheson would doubtless want me to acknowledge, fish is extremely important and as Fergus Ewing would doubtless want me to want me to clarify, yes, I am that old.

Diet is important. I grew up in an area with calcium-rich water and, until I left home, I did not realise that soap was supposed to foam. All that happened when I used it was that it formed a scum around the bath, and that was due not simply to the infrequency with which my parents persuaded me that I should bathe, but to the high amount of calcium in the water, which was absorbed into my teeth and bones. Not everyone is so lucky, of course. In the west of Scotland, where the water is much softer, the opportunity to take up calcium is much reduced.

Some estimates suggest that 50 per cent of young women take up inadequate calcium in their diet and, while there is a suggestion that young men do little better, they are not exposed to the risks later in life that can lead to bone mass depletion, such as pregnancy, breast feeding and blood loss. Women have particular problems, which is why one in three of them will experience osteoporosis at some stage in their lives.

Young women and men are taking less exercise than they used to and exercise is important in building up bone mass at an early age. That is helpful because it means that any later loss of bone mass is offset against the substantial amount that was present in the first place.

Of course, there are other risks. A substantially higher number of young people than ever before suffer from asthma. When I was a bairn, I was one of only three who suffered from asthma in my year. Now, however, the proportion would be substantially higher. Much of the treatment of asthma is done through the inhalation of steroids, which are another cause of bone mass depletion, which means that, in the future, there might be an uplift in problems relating to bone mass depletion.

Furthermore, the inadequate calcium intake that I spoke of earlier means that people's teeth are not as good as they used to be. One of the results of that is gingivitis and inflammation of the gums. Again, the treatment for those problems is generally steroid-based.

I am sure that we all agree about the need to address the range of problems that are developing in our young people with regard to osteoporosis. However, I should also mention that there is a rise in the number of auto-immune diseases of one sort or another, which affect all age groups and which are also often treated with steroids.

Just as we eliminated rickets in the young by appropriate action after the war, it is important that we eliminate osteoporosis in the old now. It has been suggested that exposing people to sunlight for 15 minutes on three occasions a week would be a help. I do not propose that the Executive send everyone to the south of Spain three times a week; an improvement in the weather in Scotland would be welcome, however.

Let us bear in mind that the cost of treating the fractures that are caused by osteoporosis is £15 a year for everyone in our population. This is an important problem. We must spend more money but we must also devote more of our attention to the problem.

17:33

Nora Radcliffe (Gordon) (LD): About this time last year, my husband and I were in our sitting room when we heard an awful thud from upstairs, where our nonagenarian aunt was going to bed. We found her lying on the floor and it transpired that either she had fallen and broken her leg or she had fallen because her leg had broken. Whichever is the case, she spent weeks in hospital and, while she has made an amazing recovery, she is markedly more frail than she was before. Often, elderly women who are leading independent lives prior to a similar incident are not able to go back to independent living afterwards and need expensive service provision. No one would grudge them that, but everyone involved would prefer to avoid it if at all possible. It makes both humane and material sense to take osteoporosis seriously.

It is important to make people aware of the lifestyle choices that can help to prevent osteoporosis and I would endorse what Fergus Ewing said about that and emphasise that exercise is important in early life.

Osteoporosis occurs in men, but women are much more at risk, as they have naturally smaller bones, which are less dense, and also because the menopause greatly accelerates bone loss.

Osteoporosis is called the silent disease, because bone loss occurs without symptoms. Awareness of risk factors is therefore important. The diagnostic test for osteoporosis is a bone density scan. I advocate better access to bone density scanning for women who may be at risk because it is a good thing to do, but also because it is spending to save. Screening can reduce the incidence of fractures by half.

I will mention some of the work that has been going on in Aberdeen over the past 10 years. In 1994, I was one of a random sample of around 5,000 women in Grampian who were called in for bone density scans. In passing, it was comforting to discover that my bones were suitably dense, but of wider benefit than my peace of mind was the useful data that were collected to inform policy on osteoporosis.

In Grampian, general practitioners and hospital doctors can refer patients at risk of osteoporosis for bone density scans, but there is a waiting list of about a year. The scanning facility costs about £55,000 per annum, excluding the consultant's time, and processes 1,500 scans every year. Dr Reid, who runs the service, estimates that 2,500 scans per annum would meet the demand. At a cost of £36 per patient, that could prove to be a good investment.

17:36

Fiona Hyslop (Lothians) (SNP): Almost 10 years ago to the day, I broke my wrist on the morning of the 12/12/92 demonstration for democracy as part of the campaign to achieve the Parliament. I know from that experience how debilitating three months in plaster was—I could not wash my hair or get the Christmas presents, for example. As Mary Scanlon said, for those who suffer from osteoporosis and cannot necessarily return to active living, it is imperative that we address the issue. We must have sympathy with osteoporosis suffers, but if one message is coming from the debate, it is that prevention and considering osteoporosis in the round for all the community are the way forward.

I am particularly interested in the material on the action plan for population-wide primary prevention measures, with which the National Osteoporosis Society provided us. That material shows us the areas for intervention. Half the problem is that people are not aware that they may be at risk. Those with a family member—perhaps a mother—who has had, for example, a hip problem, may be worried that they or other female family members may have osteoporosis, but not know what to do or where to go. When they decide that they want to do something about it, the facilities may not exist for them to have the scan that can help so much.

From contacts that I have had with the National Osteoporosis Society, I know that there are problems in Edinburgh, where no clinician specialises in osteoporosis. In the Forth Valley NHS Board area, there is no clinician for osteoporosis. We must address those issues and ensure that, where we can get the prevention message across, we have the facilities to follow it through. I also have concerns about the availability of scanners. My understanding is that there are none in the Forth Valley area. The scanner at St John's hospital at Howden in West Lothian is only open on a Monday and a Wednesday. In Edinburgh, there is only one scanner, at the Western general hospital.

I appeal to the minister to think about osteoporosis in the round and to think about it in the public health arena, particularly among our young people. There is a danger that osteoporosis is considered something for older people. We can change the agenda by recognising, as Michael Matheson did, that we need to think about younger people not only as sufferers, but in terms of prevention. My children get their milk and enjoy it. However, an awful lot can be done, particularly on the nutritious school meals agenda. Are we taking the calcium agenda into the nutritious school meals agenda?

I understand that the minister was at last week's falls prevention conference, which was held in conjunction with Age Concern Scotland and health professionals. The National Osteoporosis Society is concerned that osteoporosis is only considered part of the older age group agenda. Will the minister reassure us that, when he considers what the Executive can do to support the osteoporosis agenda, he will acknowledge that it must be part of the public health agenda?

As I have said, we should address the issue in the round. Let us ensure that we make a difference, because investment made today will reap rewards for tomorrow. If that means peace of mind for today's population and security for the next generation, we should make that investment.

17:40

The Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care (Mr Frank McAveety): I thank Fergus Ewing for raising the important issue of osteoporosis, which affects a considerable number of citizens in Scotland. I also thank the National Osteoporosis Society for maintaining a public profile on the issue. There is a consensus in the chamber and among political parties about the variety of strategies that need to be adopted to tackle what is a growing concern.

I wish to address the demography of osteoporosis, its age profile, the approaches that may be taken at health board level and the question of resources, as well as other points that members raised in the debate.

I have listened carefully to what we might call the personal confessions from individuals' past. I remind Stewart Stevenson of the old Jesuit phrase: "I cannot know what you know." Now that I know what his bathing quality was like, I might keep 10 or 15 yards away from him in future.

On Michael Matheson's contribution, I recall the discussion that we shared on a previous occasion. I will make a confession—and this will be a big surprise to everyone. Sadly, I was a milk monitor. Members can imagine the kind of scams that were pulled to maximise the consumption of milk by Michael and friends over the week. I made him particularly sick of it, judging from what he had left in the stash by the end of the day.

Of course, osteoporosis is an important issue, and members have quite rightly identified the figures. The evidence suggests that, typically, about one in three women and one in 12 men over the age of 50 will have an osteoporotic fracture at some stage in their life. The condition has a clear impact.

Clearly, there is an exceptional cost element for the health service, but the real issue is how we change the dynamic, so that we avoid having to administer costly treatment and so that we find various ways to make a difference, through lifestyle and support services.

Members have mentioned the risk factors that are associated with a family history of osteoporosis, particularly among women. The incidence of smoking among women has increased over the past 20 years, and we must bear in mind a range of other issues related to lifestyle choice, opportunities for exercise and so on.

Mary Scanlon touched on the impact of hormone replacement therapy on women who are going through, or are just past, the menopause—we have to consider the fact that pills, implants and gels that are used to replace oestrogen in the body do not have the same effects. We need to address the range of issues and co-ordinate our actions.

Not that long ago, the National Osteoporosis Society produced a document with a foreword by Dr Mac Armstrong, the chief medical officer, which contained a series of strategies.

One of the key themes of the debate was what the Executive is trying to do and what the Executive can encourage people to do to make a difference. I note that my colleague, Andy Kerr, the Minister for Finance and Public Services, is here. One of the key elements in the latest spending review was the health improvement agenda. In the long run, that should start to intervene in the areas that members have highlighted, if things are done properly over the next few years. That involves trying to reduce the incidence of smoking and recognising the impact of other lifestyle choices.

I recognise the different views about the impact on young children of milk at different stages of development. The use of milk among young primary school children would have a substantial impact; whether or not its use is most effective for teenagers, particularly teenage girls, is openly debated in health circles. We are keen to move on that issue. That is why we want to make progress on the recommendations of the expert panel on school meals, which advised that, each week, children should have at least one portion of food from milk and dairy products in their school meals.

Many local authorities have adopted a positive approach to milk, but that is not universal throughout Scotland. That is one of the issues that ministers are currently having to assess in the context of the health improvement agenda and as a consequence of the Parliament's recent debate on the broader issues around school meals.

I have outlined some of the key strategies. Another key strategy is to keep people physically active. That is especially important for younger people. The physical activity task force, which reported recently, produced a series of recommendations aimed at keeping Scotland's older people physically active. A range of measures is being taken.

We need to reduce smoking and alcohol misuse, to implement the diet action plan and to develop the work of the physical activity task force. Measures that have been taken over the past few years to encourage breast-feeding have had an impact in parts of Scotland. The challenge is to ensure that breast-feeding takes place in all social classes and becomes much more widespread. We also need to make the investment that people have requested in the active primary schools programme and in school sport co-ordinators. In the long term, those measures should make a difference.

We recognise that more immediate action is needed. Both education and intervention are required. I acknowledge the point that was made about the recent falls prevention conference. We need to be concerned about the impact of falls not just on Scotland's older people, but on young people.

I want to stress the issue of research, which was raised in the debate. Substantial research has been undertaken so far. The chief scientist office would welcome well-founded applications for funding for research into osteoporosis. Currently it is funding one research project on osteoporosis, which is entitled "Identification and mapping of osteoporosis genes in the general population by DNA pooling". Once we have that evidence, we may be able to target resources, as Nora Radcliffe suggested.

At the moment, scientists are telling us that the statistical return on the use of scanning machines is uneven. It is difficult to justify a national screening programme, because in 50 out of 100 cases the result may be unclear. The National Osteoporosis Society wants to open up a debate on that issue. I reassure members that the door is not closed on screening, but for the reason that I have given, the Medical Research Council is not convinced that a national screening programme would be effective.

Fergus Ewing: I do not disagree with any of the points that the minister has made. I understand that the NOS is not calling for national screening to be introduced. However, it is very concerned about the availability of scanning, especially for those who are most at risk. The minister and a number of other members have mentioned which categories of people are most at risk. Will he undertake to extract from each health board—particularly those where cover is non-existent or patchy—a statement indicating whether it will adopt a policy on scanning, what access will be available and what policies will be followed? Will the Executive actively pursue the issue of scanning in the future, to ensure that all people who are at risk have proper access to a DEXA scan?

Mr McAveety: I am conscious of the time, but I will try to deal with the key issues that Fergus Ewing has raised.

The Scottish needs assessment programme produced advice on protection against, detection of and management of the disease, which has been issued to boards to assist them in dealing with the issues. If Fergus Ewing is seeking an overview of the situation, we would be happy to explore that with health boards. Health boards need to carry out a mapping exercise to determine scanning requirements and the number of staff who are needed to deliver the service.

The Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network, to which members have referred, is in the process of producing a clinical guideline on osteoporosis, which is expected to be completed early next year. We want to use that as one way of improving the quality of service throughout Scotland. If we seek quick successes, we must identify where the highest risk factors are concentrated. By pulling together the two or three strategies that I have outlined, we can genuinely make a difference.

The fundamental message that members have conveyed is that we will make a difference in the long term by changing the lifestyle and health environment of citizens in Scotland. We may no longer have to deal with poverty factors such as rickets, but people are making unwise diet choices that will have an impact on our capacity to cope with osteoporosis, which emerges as people become older.

Tonight has been a welcome contribution. I am happy to take on board the specific points that members have raised on follow-through and to come back to members to indicate what we can do. I am also conscious that all MSPs received a booklet from the National Osteoporosis Society this week, which I hope will help to develop ideas. No doubt questions will follow that welcome development.

I thank Fergus Ewing for giving the Scottish Parliament its first opportunity to discuss osteoporosis. I hope that in a few years' time, we can come back and say that a difference has been made in relation to some of the things that came out of the discussion. That is the fundamental reason why we all wanted the Parliament to succeed in the first place.

Meeting closed at 17:50.

Session 1 (2003)
Scottish Parliament

Official Report

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

27 March 2003
CONTENTS

Thursday 27 March 2003

Debates

CLOSING THE OPPORTUNITY GAP FOR OLDER PEOPLE
Motion moved—[Ms Margaret Curran].
Amendment moved—[Mr Kenneth Gibson].
Amendment moved—[Mr Keith Harding].
The Minister for Social Justice (Ms Margaret Curran)
Mr Kenneth Gibson (Glasgow) (SNP)
Mr Keith Harding (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Ian Jenkins (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD)
Trish Godman (West Renfrewshire) (Lab)
Kay Ullrich (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Bill Butler (Glasgow Anniesland) (Lab)
Mary Scanlon (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Donald Gorrie (Central Scotland) (LD)
Colin Campbell (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Mr David Davidson (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Paul Martin (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab)
Alex Neil (Central Scotland) (SNP)
John Young (West of Scotland) (Con)
Dorothy-Grace Elder (Glasgow) (Ind)
Christine Grahame (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Sarah Boyack (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
Ms Sandra White (Glasgow) (SNP)
Robert Brown (Glasgow) (LD)
Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh (Central Scotland) (Con)
Linda Fabiani (Central Scotland) (SNP)
The Deputy Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning (Lewis Macdonald)
GREAT NORTHERN PARTNERSHIP
Motion debated—[Elaine Thomson].
Elaine Thomson (Aberdeen North) (Lab)
Brian Adam (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Mr Tom McCabe (Hamilton South) (Lab)
Richard Lochhead (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Sarah Boyack (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
The Deputy Minister for Social Justice (Des McNulty)
QUESTION TIME
SCOTTISH EXECUTIVE
A82 (Tarbet to Inverarnan)
Adoption
Agriculture
Air Services (Glasgow to Barra)
European Maritime Safety Agency
Ferry (Ballycastle to Cambeltown)
Housing
Less Favoured Areas Support (Crofting)
Nursery Schools (Consultation)
Police (Fife)
Racial Prejudice
Schools (Class Sizes)
Scottish Borders (Economy)
FIRST MINISTER'S QUESTION TIME
British Sign Language (Interpreters)
Cabinet (Meetings)
Entitlement Cards
Forth Estuary Transport Authority
Prime Minister (Meetings)
Schools (British History)
MOTION OF THANKS
Motion moved—[Mr Jack McConnell]—and agreed to.
The First Minister (Mr Jack McConnell)
Mr John Swinney (North Tayside) (SNP)
David McLetchie (Lothians) (Con)
The Deputy First Minister and Minister for Justice (Mr Jim Wallace)
John Young (West of Scotland) (Con)
The Minister for Parliamentary Business (Patricia Ferguson)
The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel)
DECISION TIME

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

27 March 2003
Scottish Parliament

Thursday 27 March 2003

[THE DEPUTY PRESIDING OFFICER opened the meeting at 09:30]

Closing the Opportunity Gap for Older People

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Mr George Reid): Good morning. The first item of business today is a debate on motion S1M-4064, in the name of Margaret Curran, on closing the opportunity gap for older people, and two amendments to that motion.

Tommy Sheridan (Glasgow) (SSP): On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I will finish the introduction, Mr Sheridan, and then I will call you.

Those members who wish to contribute to the debate should please press their request-to-speak buttons now.

Tommy Sheridan: I have already informed the Presiding Officer's office that the Scottish Coalition for Justice not War has asked for the observance of a minute's silence today at 11 am in memory of all those who have been killed so far in the conflict in Iraq. No disrespect is meant to any member who is speaking at that time, but some members will observe a minute's silence then.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We have no wish to diminish the feelings of people on the subject, Mr Sheridan, but there is a public demonstration throughout Edinburgh and I suggest that the appropriate place to observe a minute's silence is with the people of Edinburgh. We will come to that at the appropriate time. I call Margaret Curran to speak to and move the motion.

09:31

The Minister for Social Justice (Ms Margaret Curran): This is an historic moment for the Parliament—although I think that I have said that in most of the debates in which I have spoken, which have been historic for one reason or another. However, this truly is an historic moment, as it is the last debate in this session of Parliament—it is a great privilege to speak in it. It is particularly appropriate that we are focusing on older people, because that signals the importance of that area of work and of that key group in our population, not only to the Executive—which I will talk about in my speech—but to the Parliament.

Undoubtedly, the debate will, by definition, be wide ranging and will cover many areas, such as investment in and the quality of services, the need to create new opportunities and the quality of life in our local communities. Of course, fundamentally, we need to listen to the voices of older people. However, it is significant that we have framed the debate around closing the opportunity gap, because social justice has been at the top of Scotland's agenda in the past four years. This final debate should reflect that.

When the Scottish Parliament was established, levels of poverty and exclusion were a blight on our country. I would not like to disappoint Keith Harding in my last formal speech from the podium—I really should rant about the Tories at this point, but it seems too early in the morning for that and I might save my passion for a wee bit later, if he will forgive me. [MEMBERS: "Oh!"] There is an offer that he cannot refuse. I will leave my condemnation of the Tories until later in the debate.

I want to talk about the significant steps that the Executive is taking to consign the Tory years and poverty to the past. We have shown our determination to close the opportunity gap, so that those who are most at risk can make real choices and make the most of the opportunities that our society should present to them.

Mr David Davidson (North-East Scotland) (Con): I am delighted to be speaking to Margaret Curran in this, the last meeting of the Parliament in this session. Does she think that the Chancellor of the Exchequer has the same objectives as she has, given that he is taking £5 billion a year out of the pension funds? Can she explain that away?

Ms Curran: That question gives me a pleasurable opportunity to say that perhaps the best thing that has happened to this country in the past five years has been Gordon Brown's prudent economic approach, which has led to unparalleled investment, unparalleled opportunities for our older people and a level of income for older people that the Tories could never have dreamed of. I am more than proud to celebrate the achievements of Gordon Brown. That is not bad: two minutes into my speech and I am ranting. Self-awareness is a great thing.

The Executive has shown its determination to close the opportunity gap. Often, as I have debated with my colleagues on the SNP benches and with Lyndsay McIntosh, who may not be taking part in the debate today—

Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh (Central Scotland) (Con): Oh, but I am.

Ms Curran: Yes, she is. We have debated poverty on many occasions in the Parliament. Those debates have been robust, enjoyable and thorough, but they have often tended to focus on children and young people—quite properly, because we know that we need to strive to prevent children and young people from falling into poverty and exclusion. It is important that we do that to break the poverty cycle.

However, it is also important that we do not do that at the expense of understanding the impact of poverty on older citizens and the need to improve services and direct resources for that key part of the population. It is appropriate that today's debate focuses on how we have begun to close the opportunity gap for older people. If I have one theme, it is: much done, still more to do. I am sure that members are familiar with that theme, because we have made significant achievements but recognise that there is still some way to go.

We have moved many people out of poverty and provided them with the means for a better life. We are ensuring that, as people get older, they can continue to enrich Scotland with their skills, experience, energy and enthusiasm. Our vision is to ensure that every person beyond working age has a decent quality of life. Therefore, our long-term goals are to ensure that older people are financially secure, to increase the number of older people who enjoy active, healthy and independent lives and to help older people to access opportunities and choices that our society offers to everyone.

We must think of older people not only in terms of their needs, but in terms of what they can offer. Too often in the past, we have regarded elderly citizens as passive recipients of services, but we should encourage elderly citizens to be proactive in shaping the society around them. At present, 1.7 million Scots are over 50. That significant proportion of our population makes an invaluable contribution to the cultural, economic and social fabric of the nation. I will talk more about that later.

As people get older, a range of support is necessary to allow them to continue to play a full and active role in society. Along with the United Kingdom Government and other partners, we aim to provide that support. Two weeks ago, we announced with the Department for Work and Pensions that, between 1996-97 and 2001-02, 80,000 pensioners were lifted out of relative income poverty and 170,000 were lifted out of absolute income poverty. That is a fall in the proportion of pensioners living in income poverty from 29 per cent to 20 per cent in relative terms. In only five years, that must be regarded as a major success.

Given the improvement in overall economic conditions, and with medium-income figures rising by 19 per cent, those are particularly encouraging statistics that underline our commitment to provide financial security. By April, the minimum income guarantee will ensure that no pensioner will have to live on less than £102 a week and pensioner couples will receive £155.80 a week. From August 2003, the new pension credit will provide extra assistance for pensioners living on low and modest incomes. We will ensure that, for the first time, pensioners with savings are rewarded for their thrift.

All pensioners have the benefit of the £200 winter fuel payment and the over-75s receive free television licences, which are currently worth £112 a year. Furthermore, we are working with the Department for Work and Pensions, local authorities and the voluntary sector in the partnership against poverty. That group is focused on improving the uptake of social security benefits available to older people throughout Scotland.

Not all older people are pensioners and it is essential that we take advantage of the experience, knowledge and skills of the over-50s work force. The employment rate for the over-50s is improving. In 2002, it stood at 64 per cent, but that is still below the average for working-age people in Scotland, which is 73 per cent. We want to close that gap to give older people the opportunity to get back into work and to use their skills. That can often mean giving people advice and training them in new skills. Great Britain schemes, such as the new deal 50 plus, can and do help older people to find their way back into the workplace. So far, 11,500 jobs have been found on that scheme in Scotland.

We can also record our achievements with initiatives that not only improve the quality of life for older people, but have the added benefit of reducing daily living expenses. The Scottish Executive is committed to ensuring—as far as is reasonably practical—that people will not live in fuel poverty within 15 years. We are on track to achieve that commitment.

I refer back to the bad Tory years—they were not so long ago that we cannot remember what it was like when people were living in damp, cold houses and could not afford to pay their bills. Our commitment to eradicating fuel poverty and to having it within our grasp is probably one of the Executive's most significant achievements.

Fuel poverty exists as a result of a number of factors—income, fuel costs and the energy efficiency of the home. We are taking action on all three factors. We have talked about the increasing prosperity of our older people. The UK Government has reduced VAT on domestic fuel and we have made great strides on energy efficiency. Through the central heating programme, around 18,000—

Mary Scanlon (Highlands and Islands) (Con): We have all received a briefing from Help the Aged this morning. Given the work that the Executive has done on fuel poverty, does the minister agree with Help the Aged that 58 per cent of Scottish pensioners are classified as living in fuel poverty and that that figure is rising?

Ms Curran: I have not seen the Help the Aged briefing and I am wise enough not to endorse figures that I have not seen. Let me make our position abundantly clear. We have said that fuel poverty cannot be turned around in a year or so, but we have a long-term commitment to its eradication. No Government has ever made that historic commitment before. I know that the organisations that work on fuel poverty have said that that is a significant achievement and have congratulated us on our commitment to eradicate fuel poverty.

One of the most significant emblems of that commitment has been the central heating programme, which we have debated in the chamber before. It will be a lasting testament to the significant work of the Executive that older people have central heating in their homes that they would not have had before. Nearly 10,000 pensioners in Scotland have central heating because of the Executive's work. The Tories abandoned them and we did not.

Mr Davidson: Transco is heavily involved in delivering, on behalf of the Executive, the central heating programme for pensioners and others. Representatives of Transco have told me twice in the past six months that there are 2,500 too few technicians and that the programme cannot be delivered because the Executive is not training people. Moreover, does the minister agree that it was astonishing that Iain Gray said yesterday that unemployment in the older age group is going down when the fact is that those people are being forced to go to work because they cannot afford to live without working?

Ms Curran: My God, it will be quite a debate if the Tories are going to start defending the unemployed. The Conservatives are experienced in issues relating to massive levels of unemployment. I will take no lectures about unemployment from them.

Success brings its own challenges. Because we have economic prosperity and many opportunities, we require more skilled people. The construction boom in Glasgow is just one example of that. We need to keep training the engineers to deliver the central heating programme, but I am reliably informed that we are on target to deliver the work force that is required to install the central heating. Although the entire programme will be completed by March 2006, local authorities will complete their part of the programme by April 2004, which is two years earlier than planned. That means that the programme cannot be in that much disarray.

The warm deal contributes to energy savings. Our programme for government target to insulate 100,000 houses by March 2002 was achieved almost 18 months ahead of schedule. There are now 137 more energy-efficient homes. New building standards that were enforced this month mean that Scotland now has the highest mandatory standards for energy efficiency for new homes in the UK.

Taken together, the measures will provide, on average, annual savings on bills of £290 for those aged over 60 and £350 for those in local authority housing association properties. The measures are not just about saving money; they are also about having a warm, dry home. We all know the contribution that that makes to closing the opportunity gap.

On another front, if older people are to maintain active social, cultural, educational and working lives, it is essential that public transport is available, accessible and affordable. Last year, Iain Gray and Lewis Macdonald introduced free local off-peak bus travel for more than 1 million elderly and disabled people throughout Scotland. Again, that is an historic commitment and a key delivery for the Scottish Executive.

Mr Kenneth Gibson (Glasgow) (SNP): Will the minister give way?

Ms Curran: I must press on, as I do not want to run out of time. We can pursue some of those issues later.

Helping our older people to be more active is part of our strategy to improve their overall quality of life. Our efforts in that regard begin with listening to older people to find out what they want. In the past, once people became less able to manage for themselves, it was felt that the best solution was for them to go into care. From listening to older people, we know that they often prefer to live independently in their own homes. Earlier this month, we announced £200 million of funding during the first year of the supporting people programme, which is another major progressive delivery of support services. That new policy for housing support services will make all the difference for older people and others in enabling them to stay in their own home rather than having to go into care. Around 100,000 people are likely to be helped.

Vulnerable people will be given the assistance that they need to keep their home, live more independently and feel secure. It will not matter whether they live in a flat, a house, sheltered accommodation or a hostel, whether they live on their own or share, or whether they own their home or rent from a landlord. The care-and-repair scheme for elderly and other vulnerable people allows improvements, repairs and adaptations to be made to their homes.

We are closing the opportunity gap for older people not only in their individual households, but in the community, because that is what older people's organisations tell us that we must do. We must ensure that the needs of elderly people are centre stage in all our policies.

Safety is an important element of our regeneration agenda. Older people must be safe and must feel safe in their own communities. It is not acceptable that there is an effective curfew on older people in their communities, where they do not feel that they can use their own streets at night. If there is one aim that we must pursue, it is that elderly people can reclaim their own communities and live properly and safely in them.

That is why Jim Wallace has provided record numbers of police to deal with violence, drug crime and housebreaking. We have introduced youth courts and fast-track hearings to tackle youth crime and have introduced more than 2,000 additional closed-circuit television cameras to help to prevent crime and to make our communities safer. At the other end of the spectrum, we have provided support to Age Concern Scotland's elder abuse project. We have also committed £20 million to rolling out my proposal for the community wardens scheme and £10 million to other community-based initiatives that will allow us to contribute to safer communities.

We know that good health and quality of life go hand in hand. Promoting good health for Scots of all ages has been a top priority for the Executive. By encouraging older people to improve their diet and to take regular exercise, we can help them to avoid debilitating illnesses and to retain their independence for as long as possible. We have some way to go—there is no doubt about that—but recent statistics are encouraging. Between 1997 and 2001, deaths per 100,000 for under-75s from coronary heart disease fell by 25 per cent. In that age group, deaths from stroke fell by 16 per cent and deaths from cancer fell by 4.8 per cent over that period.

Last week, Malcolm Chisholm launched the health improvement challenge paper, which sets out a framework for action. It focuses on the key risk factors, all of which affect older people. We are determined to accelerate the rate of health improvement and to reduce health inequalities by improving the health of our most disadvantaged communities, because we know that that will impact on the opportunities of older people.

Last month, along with many colleagues from the Executive, the First Minister launched "Let's Make Scotland More Active: A strategy for physical activity". We will encourage older people to participate in physical activity, so that they can play a part in that strategy. The healthy eating and healthy living advice line and website should make it easier for older people to access information.

One of the Executive's most significant policies has been the introduction of free personal and nursing care for people aged 65 and over. The Executive has taken away the burden of financial worry from more than 75,000 pensioners. That means that they can be confident that they will get the level of personal care and support that they deserve, which will give them dignity and security. A critical part of creating a fairer Scotland is that we ensure that free personal care delivers and works. The Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002, which the Parliament passed, represents a major step forward in improving the arrangements for community care in Scotland.

Older people rarely need the services of just one agency, but it is at the boundaries between agencies that we have perhaps faced difficulties in the past. Older people do not particularly care which agency provides a service, but we must ensure that all the agencies meet their needs. In community care, we have been making major strides towards integrated responses by implementing the joint future agenda. That agenda is about better local integrated services and about how the national health service and local authority resources should be used jointly. Older people in some areas are already benefiting from better and faster assessments, access to a wide range of services from a single entry point and more co-ordinated responses to their general needs. Those benefits should be available more widely and, by April 2004, we will be applying the same principles to all community care.

We should always be careful not to stereotype older people, because their needs and issues extend far beyond basic care and support. If we are sincere about valuing our older people, we must provide the conditions that allow them to play the active role that I talked about.

Johann Lamont (Glasgow Pollok) (Lab): The minister mentioned stereotyping older people. Does she agree that the experience of older women can be very different from that of older men? Given their work patterns when they were younger and their lack of a pension, older women are more likely to be low paid and are certainly more likely to be carers. In my constituency, there are many grandmothers looking after the children of drug-abusing parents. Does the Scottish Executive have a strategy to address the specific needs of women pensioners, who may be among the most vulnerable of our older people?

Ms Curran: I thank Johann Lamont for introducing another theme that is dear to my heart. In the equality strategy, we have now recognised that age is itself a key determination. We have to join up our understandings of gender discrimination and age discrimination. We have categorically stated that that must be mainstreamed across all policies in the Executive. It is important that all ministers, holding all portfolios, are engaged in elderly-related issues. They must understand the distinct experiences that women have had in their working lives and through their caring responsibilities and they must understand the impact that those experiences have later on in women's lives. The experiences of women from ethnic-minority communities can have their own particular dimension. We are on the cusp of delivering sensitive services that meet the needs of different groups, but there is no doubt that the inequality of women shows itself as much within the elderly section of the population as it does more generally.

The lifelong learning strategy is significant for ensuring that elderly people get their fair opportunities. I emphasise the need to ensure that digital inclusion extends to the elderly population. We have committed ourselves to providing public internet access points to ensure that elderly people, too, can access the web. Age Concern Scotland is working with us to identify target venues that may be particularly geared towards older people.

One of the most significant aspects of my work lies in recognising the contribution that elderly people make, through volunteering, to services provided for other people. Often, it is elderly people who run lunch clubs, for example. That breaks down the stereotypes around older people. We must ensure that older people get their fair share in our voluntary sector and volunteering strategies.

We recognise that older people in rural communities face particular challenges. The report of the rural poverty and inclusion working group highlighted the issues around poverty and social exclusion for older people living in rural areas. It is important that we pursue those issues.

Listening to older people is a key plank of our approach. If the Government does not listen to the people, we often get the policies wrong. If we work in partnership, we can move towards much more radical policies. There is some evidence that we have done that. Frank McAveety set up and chairs the older people's consultative forum, which provides a basis for partnership working with older people, who can tell us about the barriers that they face, the additional opportunities that they want to have and how they want to contribute. I am sure that they laugh at Frank's jokes and that the meetings are most entertaining, but the forum allows us to develop an agenda for taking forward that partnership working.

This is the last Executive debate of this first session of the Scottish Parliament and, as I said, it is appropriate that we are discussing the needs of elderly people and the real, practical changes that we have introduced to lift standards of living and to raise opportunities for them. We have demonstrated that, with the proper resources and the right action, it is possible to make a real difference to people's quality of life. We are not complacent, however, and we recognise that much more needs to be done. It is with great pleasure that I now conclude my last speech as Minister for Social Justice in this session of Parliament by moving,

That the Parliament welcomes the Scottish Executive's commitment to close the opportunity gap for Scotland's older people by building first-class public services and developing initiatives in health, transport and other priority areas, which will support older people in living healthy, active and independent lives.

09:53

Mr Kenneth Gibson (Glasgow) (SNP): That was a nice, cheery speech from the Minister for Social Justice. She is obviously demob happy, and I do not intend to lower the tone too much in my speech.

There are 944,000 people of pensionable age in Scotland—about 19 per cent of the total estimated Scottish population. By 2026, there will be about 1.3 million people of pensionable age, or approximately 27 per cent of the total Scottish population. Life expectancy stands at 72.9 years for men and 78.2 years for women. As was recently reported, those figures are, sadly, among the lowest in western Europe.

Despite the advances that have been made, of the 641 mainland parliamentary constituencies in Britain, 10 of the 20 poorest are in Glasgow, so there are certain areas of health inequality still to be addressed. That will take not just years but generations. A majority of people of pensionable age are female, because of women's longer life expectancy. As a result, many of them will live alone and will consequently suffer high morbidity rates.

We would all agree that many of the attitudes held by some people in our society towards older people must change. Jess Barrow, head of policy at Age Concern Scotland, said:

"Some of the ways we treat old people we just would not accept for any other section of society."

Unfortunately, the European Union is not due to implement anti-ageism legislation until 2006. A recent King's Fund guide found that ageism is difficult to identify because people are not used to having to recognise it, given the lack of anti-discrimination legislation that is related to age, unlike that which exists for race or gender for example. However, more than half of Scots believe that

"this country treats older people as if they are on the scrap-heap"—

and almost half believe that

"old people in this country are considered to be a burden on society."

Ageism, or discrimination against older people, may not consist of deliberate sentiments against older persons, but may involve them being patronised through ignorance of their need to be treated as fairly as everyone else. The Executive has set up an equalities strategy, the older people's unit and the older people's consultative forum, and it is great to see the forum's chair, the esteemed Frank McAveety, here today. However, more must be done to reverse the deep-rooted social acceptance of patronising and discriminatory behaviour towards older people so that we treat them with the respect that they deserve.

Age discrimination occurs because a low value is associated with older people's lives. The idea exists that older people had their chance and that their quality of life, as an older person, is not worth saving as much as that of a younger person. Some people believe that older people are a burden to others, such as their family or friends or the NHS.

Many older people do not face only discrimination as a result of their age. They may also suffer from multiple problems due to age and disability—indeed, they may face discrimination on the ground of disability. As Ros Levenson, author of "Auditing Age Discrimination: A practical approach to promoting equality in health and social care" stated:

"Tackling age discrimination is too low on the agenda for many health and social care organisations. But ageism is a serious equality issue."

I am pleased that the minister touched on that matter.

Of course, the majority of older people are fit and healthy and should not be thought of merely as a burden on the NHS. Health is one area of older people's lives in which they are likely to encounter both positive discrimination—for example, exemption from prescription charges—and negative discrimination, such as age limits for transplant services in the NHS. Executive targets for reducing the incidence of cancer, heart disease and stroke apply only to those below the age of 75. In the words of Maureen O'Neill, the director of Age Concern Scotland, that approach will "entrench these inequalities". My colleague Kay Ullrich will explore the impact of health care on elderly people in greater detail, as it is an important issue for older people.

Some initiatives are proactive, but they will not make a difference until other problems in the care of older people are rectified. One survey—"Hard Times: A study of pensioner poverty" contained the following message from an older person:

"Thank you very much for my free TV licence but I would really like to have my cataracts done so that I could see the television."

A quarter of suicides occur in older people, although they make up less than a quarter of the general population. Ninety per cent of those concerned had serious depression and most visited their doctor in the three months prior to their death. That may indicate that general practitioners are not taking the mental health needs of older people seriously. I encountered that problem, especially in the treatment of depression, in a previous life. When older people who are suffering from depression visit a doctor, they are often given older drugs such as tricyclic antidepressants, which can dope and slow down older people, making them more liable to falls and so on. Younger people, who tend to work or have families, receive drugs such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, which cost 20 times more per day than the drugs that are given to older people. I encountered that apartheid in primary health care on many occasions before I was elected to the Parliament, which may want to examine that issue.

Long-stay hospitals have closed in favour of treating older people in the community, and that is to be welcomed. Implementing the joint futures agenda to provide more seamless care between the NHS, local authorities and community and social care has reduced the number of delayed discharges. As the minister indicated, the Parliament has introduced free personal care for the elderly and the regulation of care services in Scotland. However, although welcoming the progress that free personal care is making in local authorities, a recent Age Concern Scotland report argued that there was a continuing need to publicise it and to provide clarity about the policy. The report found that there is a postcode lottery in available care places and that waiting times for care provision vary. Its authors were also very concerned about long-term funding.

Scottish Care, the Executive and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities need to renegotiate funding for private care homes, before older people who require care become the innocent victims of the crisis in funding in community care. Their human rights may be breached. As Tessa Harding, head of policy at Help the Aged, states:

"Homes have to be closed with care ... if the Human Rights Act is not to be breached ... Where are these residents to go? There is already a major crisis in the care home sector and few areas have spare capacity."

Bedblocking remains a problem. Some 2,798 patients are awaiting hospital discharge, 239 of whom have waited more than 12 months. If the Executive does not find it acceptable for people to wait more than 12 months to get into hospital, why is it acceptable for them to wait more than 12 months to get out? In addition, the number of people receiving a home-care service has declined since 1999 by 7,357, and the number of residential care places has fallen from 16,300 to 15,150, which is a decline of 1,150.

An issue in which many MSPs have been interested in the past few years is that of Scotland's carers. There are approximately 626,000 carers in Scotland and about one in six is over 65. Two thirds of carers look after elderly people. It is therefore vital that we take on board the considerations of older people and carers and end the opportunity gap for carers, older people and older carers.

Benefit provision for Scottish older people, which is reserved to Westminster, is necessary to reduce and prevent poverty. Two thirds of pensioner households do not claim state benefits—of course, some are not entitled to them—but an estimated 57 per cent require some form of state benefit. Unfortunately, almost a quarter of those who are eligible do not claim. Indeed, 50,000 pensioners who are entitled to the means-tested minimum income guarantee do not claim it. Each person who has not claimed it is really entitled to an average increase of £18 in their weekly income at present, which would raise their pension levels to more than £90 on average—that was the amount that Age Concern stated was necessary in 2001. The minimum that we can guarantee is an admission that the basic state pension is inadequate to live on. Pensioners might not collect benefits because there might be a stigma attached to claiming them among older people, but it is also likely that the process is time-consuming and confusing for some of our older people.

Mr Davidson: Does Mr Gibson agree that it would be far better to raise the basic pension level, including the amount of money that people have to apply for through the bureaucratic system of means testing? That would avoid the problem that many pensioners face of having to work their way through a system that is bureaucratically inclined, favours the employment of even more civil servants and does not get the money to where it should go.

Mr Gibson: I believe that the basic pension should be raised. However, I am astonished that the Conservatives did not address that issue when they were in power. They decoupled the relationship between earnings and pensions. [Interruption.] As Frank McAveety has just shouted out, they had only 18 years in which to address the issue. We are all aware—except those on the Conservative benches—that pensioners gained no favours during the Conservatives' 18 years in power.

An Age Concern members' survey said:

"Ageing persons do not welcome complicated forms to fill in—

as Mr Davidson rightly said—

"What they hope for is minimal fuss when they find themselves obliged to call in financial help in these matters."

In 1999, a Scottish Executive survey of older people's needs and services found that there was a lack of knowledge about services and how to access them and that that was a major reason for unmet need. People tended not to approach social services for help and advice, and information did not appear to be readily available to them.

The Executive has produced a welcome document, "Are You Over 50?", to serve as a guide for older people to the service provision that is available to them, but it does not go far enough. A more widely publicised campaign for benefit take-up in Scotland is required. Alice Jarvie of SeniorLine in Scotland states that calls to SeniorLine

"reflect older people's confusion about exactly what they are entitled to."

That is particularly important, because changes to the way in which benefits are paid are to be implemented next month. Benefits are reserved, but education about them is not. Pensions are also reserved to the Department for Work and Pensions, but pensioner poverty, which is an important issue for Scottish older people, is devolved.

Minimum income benefits should enable pensioners to have a reasonable standard of living, but benefit take-up problems continue to be rife. Women who are over the age of 65 are less likely to have an occupational pension, because of career breaks for children. The fact that women are likely to live longer through retirement means that they experience particular issues relating to poverty. Today, fewer than half of people of working age contribute to a non-state pension. As members are all well aware, there is a £27 billion hole in pension provision in the United Kingdom, because of the volatile nature of the pensions market. I am sure that the Conservatives will focus heavily on that issue. I must contradict the minister, as I do not believe that current Government policies have helped to produce stability in that area. That is ominous for the future, especially as the Scottish Executive's social justice annual report showed that it had failed to increase the number of working-age people who contribute to a non-state pension, which is milestone 20 of the 2002 report.

Poverty and the number of pensioners who live in poverty are major issues of concern. Relative poverty is the issue that we should debate, in common with other European nations. I will not argue that case, as I have very little time left.

The Scottish Executive stated:

"the poorest families have experienced real increases in their living standards since 1996/97."

On the contrary, a study on Scottish poverty by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, which was published just a few months ago, concluded that in the seven years between 1994 and 2001,

"the overall sense is one of little change".

Given that I am running out of time, I will jump ahead in my speech to an issue that has not been mentioned a great deal. I am sure that my colleagues will discuss poverty at some length, but I want to make a point about fuel poverty. I have some concerns about the Executive's line on fuel poverty. Four weeks ago, the minister issued a press release that said that some 20 local authorities had finished their central heating programmes. One of those local authorities was Glasgow City Council, which will not finish its programme for three years. When I pointed that out to officials, they said that the minister would release a retraction, but that has not happened. We must be concerned about spin on that issue.

The Conservatives quoted a figure on fuel poverty. I, too, have a figure: 25 per cent of our pensioners live in a household that is cold enough to put residents at risk of hypothermia. There is still a long way to go.

Older people are more likely than younger people to worry about being mugged or robbed. Although we know that older people are less likely to suffer from crime, fear of crime can be as much of a problem as crime itself. Forty-six per cent of people who are over 65 believe that crime in their area has got worse during the past two years. Between 7 and 10 per cent of older people are victims of some form of abuse, often from family members. The Parliament has not touched on that issue in recent years, but we should examine it, especially in light of the alarming information that Age Concern has provided, which indicates that reports of abuse of the elderly have increased by 400 per cent in the past year. Although that increase might be the result of greater awareness, it is a serious concern.

I would also like to discuss transport, but I have only 30 seconds left, so I will not.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: You actually have about two minutes, Mr Gibson.

Mr Gibson: In that case, I might mention it after all. Half of those in the over-65 age group live in households with no car, whereas the corresponding figure for all households is only a quarter. Thirteen per cent of over-65s said that they could not use public transport because of illness or disability. In 2000-01, less than 16 per cent of Scotland's bus fleet had a low floor and only 12 per cent had any kind of disabled access. Half of the pedestrians who were killed on UK roads were over retirement age.

The Executive has introduced free local off-peak bus travel for older people, but there should be a coherent national concessionary fares scheme, as exists in Wales, so that older people are entitled to the same level of free travel no matter where they live or where they are travelling to. That would reduce confusion about concessions, which can catch older people short. In addition, reregulation of the bus service would help elderly people, particularly those in outlying communities.

We are all aware that age discrimination in employment can start at the age of 40. I am marginally over that age, although I will probably be the youngest member to speak in the debate.

My final point relates to our raison d'être. From a nationalist perspective, we find shocking the level of poverty in this country. If we look at the standard of living of pensioners in most other European countries of comparable size, it is clear that they get a better deal. That shows that nations can look after their own people if they have control over their own economies, benefits and taxation systems. Those nations are clearly the most prosperous and pensioners in Luxembourg, Sweden and Austria are all certainly better off than those in Scotland. The answer for Scotland's pensioners, as for Scotland's young people and the middle-aged, is independence.

I move amendment S1M-4064.2, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert:

"notes that life expectancy in Scotland is among the lowest in the developed world; further notes that Scottish Executive health targets entrench age inequalities; accepts that ageism is a reality in modern Scotland and must be countered; is aware that 25% of Scottish pensioners live in poverty; acknowledges that more coherence to the concessionary fare scheme is required; seeks more flexibility in delivering the central heating programme; desires that the postcode lottery of free personal care places be ended; recognises that older people have a vital part to play in our democracy; is concerned at continuing reductions in the value of the state pension in real and relative terms; demands that the closure of final salary scheme pensions be addressed to prevent future generations of older people being left with low incomes, financial insecurity and dependent on means-tested benefits, and believes that to address the needs of older people in Scotland the Parliament needs the full powers of an independent sovereign state."

10:10

Mr Keith Harding (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con): At the outset, I should perhaps declare an interest as I fall into the category of older people and my opportunity gap may well deteriorate in the near future. Having said that, I am absolutely delighted that the minister is present today. I will do my best to match the passion that she promised me.

I shall not patronise older people by lecturing them on which opportunities they should pursue. It is not the job of any politician to patronise older people with half-price tennis lessons or whatever the flavour of the month happens to be. Older people are more able than politicians are to decide such issues for themselves.

However, we need to ensure that older people are free to choose their opportunities. They must be free from Government discrimination against them. Sadly, over the past few years, older people have faced substantial discrimination as a result of Government policy. Older people do not want patronising assistance; they want dignity. The fact is that the Government has eroded the basic needs and expectations of pensioners, without which talk of opportunity means nothing.

Older people need to know that they can save for a pension without the fear that they are wasting their money. Gordon Brown's raid on the pension funds is a £5 billion per annum stealth tax on pensioners. That loss of hard-earned pension deprives current and future pensioners of the opportunity of a comfortable retirement. Gordon Brown's hand in the pensioners' till is depriving older people of real opportunity. Pensioners need to keep the money that they have saved, for their dignity and for other opportunities. They need to know that, if they make modest savings, they will keep £1 of every £1 that they save.

The so-called pension credit is about to be introduced, which will extend means testing to over half of all pensioners. With time, that proportion will increase further because the credit will be linked to national average earnings while the basic state pension will continue to increase only with prices. Means testing is humiliating to pensioners. It cannot be right to extend means testing to such a huge proportion of the pensioner population. People may say, "So what?" but the effect of the proposed change will be that a typical pensioner who has an annual income of £6,000 will, in effect, face a marginal tax rate of 40 per cent, which is equivalent to the rate for higher-rate taxpayers. For every extra £1 of pension or savings income, Gordon Brown will claw back 40p, so the pensioner will end up only 60p better off before income tax is taken into account.

Mr Gibson: Does Mr Harding accept that the situation is actually worse than that? Once people go over the threshold, not only will they suffer a marginal tax rate of 40 per cent but they may also lose council tax rebate and housing benefit, such that the marginal rate of taxation can be as much as 88p in the pound for those with smaller occupational pensions.

Mr Harding: I agree. I was just about to make that point, more or less. It is unfair that a pensioner on a modest but average income faces a marginal tax rate of 40 per cent but a pensioner on double the income will be able to keep £1 of every £1 saved before tax.

Furthermore, why should people save at all? If the average pensioner will receive only 60p before tax of every £1 saved, it is no wonder that so many people will now not bother saving. The Government has created a climate in which savers are discouraged and punished and the effect is to deny pensioners opportunities.

The Government takes with one hand and gives back something with the other, but older people need to know that the national health service will care for them should they become ill. Waiting lists and waiting times have steadily increased over the past three years, even with the increased levels of funding from the Scottish Executive. In the period ending December 2002, 14,769 more people were on the waiting lists than in March 1999, 83,494 fewer out-patients were seen than in March 1999, 21 per cent fewer out-patients were seen within nine weeks and 12,700 fewer elective in-patients were seen.

Older people are discriminated against by the health system. Age discrimination occurs directly and indirectly through policies aimed at shortening length of stay in hospital, as older patients take longer than average to recover from surgery or illness. Age discrimination in health and social care must be rooted out to ensure that the most vulnerable are receiving the care that they need and are entitled to.

In the Executive's social inclusion strategy "Social Justice ... a Scotland where everyone matters", which was published in 1999, the Executive committed itself to increasing the number of older people taking exercise and to reducing the rates of mortality from coronary heart disease and the prevalence of respiratory disease.

However, the Executive's policies are failing the most vulnerable. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation reveals that the standardised mortality rates among the 10 per cent most deprived local areas are double those of the least disadvantaged 50 per cent.

Older people also need to know that care home places will be available for them should they require one. However, the current care homes crisis has seen Scottish Homes and the Kirk admit that they will have to start closing their homes if the Executive does not meet the deficit that exists between the funding that care homes receive and the real cost of care. I am pleased that that issue has been resolved for the current year but it will still be a concern in future.

Older people need to know that suitable and appropriate housing is available for them. The Executive maintains that it is committed to the transfer of council housing to community ownership. However, Labour in local government has failed the council tenant. Much of Scotland's public housing is still crumbling, and new investment is desperately needed. Mismanagement has led to large rent arrears for councils that are subsequently unable to provide the funding for repairs. For example, before the approval of the transfer of 81,000 houses in Glasgow to Glasgow Housing Association last April, more than 50 per cent of rent collected serviced existing debt. The total bill for repairs was estimated at £1.3 billion. I hope that that situation will now be resolved.

In 1980, the Conservatives introduced the right-to-buy scheme. No policy introduced since then has done more to lift the vulnerable out of relative poverty in Scotland. Thanks to successive Conservative Governments, the rate of home ownership is more than 60 per cent today, compared with only 35 per cent in 1979. Scottish Office research in 1997 showed that 21.5 per cent of the homes that had been bought since 1980 under the right to buy had subsequently been resold on the open market, and that improvements, including the installation of central heating, had been made to the vast majority of them. That shows that national schemes such as the central heating programme would not always be required if more homes were owner-occupied.

Ms Curran: I am not sure whether either Mr Harding or I will be back in the next Parliament but I would not like to miss another opportunity to have a duel with him.

Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh (Central Scotland) (Con): Yes—strip to the waist.

Ms Curran: Let us not get carried away.

I know that the Conservatives were committed to the right-to-buy policy but, as ever, their approach was half-baked. There are now many people in Scotland who bought their houses under essentially false pretences, because the Conservatives encouraged people to buy irresponsibly. They did not point out to people their responsibilities for repairs to and maintenance of their houses. People were confused about that and there is now a major problem for people who do not have the income to maintain and repair their houses but who were encouraged and given inflated opportunities to purchase them. That was, as ever, a highly irresponsible policy and approach from the Conservatives.

Mr Harding: That is absolute rubbish. Whether people can afford repairs to and maintenance of their properties should be assessed by the mortgage lenders, which determine people's ability to fund a mortgage. The minister should take that into account. What is she doing to give people additional assistance?

Ms Curran: We have just changed the criteria for the private sector grant, which is predicted to rise from £40 million to £60 million in the coming years.

Mr Harding: That is just another consultation document.

The Executive has done little to assist in the provision of houses adapted specifically for elderly and disabled people, especially those in rural communities who doubly suffer from the lack of suitable housing. We would encourage local housing providers to provide adapted houses for older and disabled people through grants. We would also put in place a requirement for providers to make available for sheltered housing a minimum of 5 per cent of any new development. To increase rural housing stock, we propose to relax planning guidelines to allow the building of affordable homes for sale on the periphery of rural communities.

The Executive's warm deal initiative is a continuation of yet another Conservative policy—the home energy efficiency scheme—and was introduced in July 1999 to promote energy efficiency measures to less affluent families. The home energy efficiency scheme was very successful and assisted three million homes. Under successive Conservative Governments, the percentage of UK households with central heating rose from 60 per cent in 1981 to 90 per cent in 1997-98.

Indeed, many pensioners who have benefited from the Executive's central heating programme might have already been set to benefit, either from refurbishment schemes through the landlord or from new investment from transfers to community ownership. The Executive needs to take further measures to ensure that those who are eligible to benefit from the programme are given as much help as possible to follow that through. At present, there is a worry that the take-up rate among the elderly is too low and, given the disruption that the installation of a central heating system might cause, the Executive must articulate exactly how it will improve that rate.

Older people also want to be safe. The 2000 Scottish crime survey showed that just over 10 per cent of over-60s were worried about being assaulted. By 2002, 24 per cent of Scottish old-age pensioners were afraid to leave their homes at night and one in five of them feared that they would be mugged if they went outside. Since 1997, there has been a 24 per cent increase in recorded incidents of violent crime, a 9 per cent increase in the level of vehicle crime and a 23 per cent increase in the number of drug-related crimes.

It is time to reclaim our neighbourhoods from the criminals who destroy communities and imprison fearful people in their homes. Older people should be able to walk through their communities free from the fear of crime. To make people feel safe, we must have a fully supported, fully manned police service, which would provide effective neighbourhood policing and give crime-ridden areas a constant and visible police presence. Our police officers should be backed up by a legal system that is able to dispose of criminals appropriately and efficiently, a prison service that rehabilitates and a youth justice system that prevents youngsters from reoffending.

Consideration should be given to increasing the single occupancy discount on council tax to 50 per cent for single older people. Furthermore, we should address age discrimination in the job market by allowing older people the option of signing away their rights under normal employment regulations other than basic health and safety regulations. That would encourage employers to recruit more people from that age group. However, such ideas are for the future.

We acknowledge that the Executive is committed to closing the opportunity gap. However, although some worth-while initiatives have been introduced to address the situation, a great deal more needs to be done.

I move amendment S1M-4064.1, to leave out from "by" to end and insert:

"but notes that its policies are not working, care homes are having to close due to a funding crisis, waiting lists and times are rising, more older people feel insecure in their homes and there is an insufficient level of provision of appropriate housing for older people and considers that, if the Chancellor was to abolish his punitive stealth tax on pension funds in the forthcoming budget, the opportunity gap for older people would be greatly reduced."

10:23

Ian Jenkins (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD): I welcome the minister's speech, especially the references to rural deprivation and rural exclusion. After all, transport and access to facilities are of massive importance to older people and the need is especially acute in rural areas. Before I go any further, I should declare an interest. Like Keith Harding, I am old, and I am retiring—voluntarily, this time. Indeed, I am now retiring for the second time.

Getting old is a rite of passage. When we reach our 50s, we suddenly start receiving Saga brochures. We resent them at first, but then we start looking at the rather attractive holidays that they offer. However, I have to say that I am not so keen on the advertisements for incontinence pads and things.

Then, at 60, we become eligible for the winter heating allowance. We all think, "I don't want that". Yesterday, I received an e-mail informing me that, the day after I retire, I am allowed to have an old people's bus pass, because the age of eligibility has been reduced from 65 to 60. I now come into that category. The next thing that I have to look forward to is my pension, and then the telegram from the Queen—or perhaps it will be the King by that time. I do not think that I will last that long anyway. Those are the rites of passage.

We have stereotypes of old age. Bob Hope was asked what it felt like to be 81 and he said that he did not feel anything much until about noon, and then it was time to go for a sleep. When George Burns was in his 80s, he said that he had reached the stage when putting his cigar into its holder was a bit of a thrill.

The image of older people has changed. We are surrounded by examples of positive aging, which is the phrase that is used in one of our briefing papers. I remember attending a party for an old lady who was 90. One of her two equally elderly relatives said that the only thing that was wrong with Tina was that she was man mad. The other day, I sat at a dinner with a local dignitary who is about 85 and who gave up his 500cc Norton only a couple of years ago. My mother was 97 yesterday and played competitive bridge until about three years ago. I am holding up one of her most treasured possessions—a T-shirt marking one of her three wins, after she was 80, in the wee stinker crossword, and that is a crossword and a half. In our constituencies, we are all surrounded by silver surfers and line dancing.

It is fair to say that a good start has been made, as the minister said. That was acknowledged at the beginning of the two most recent pieces of correspondence that I received from Help the Aged and Age Concern, which both acknowledge that the Scottish Parliament has made a great and positive contribution in improving older people's lives. Those lobbyists refer to the central heating initiative, the warm deal, the concessionary fares scheme and the introduction of free care for the elderly. As MSPs, we know that none of those schemes has been introduced without individual anomalies.

Mary Scanlon: Will the member give way?

Ian Jenkins: I will give way to young Mary.

Mary Scanlon: I appreciate that very much and I am sorry to be contentious, as Ian Jenkins has been nice enough to give way.

I must have a different Help the Aged briefing from the one that Ian Jenkins has, because the second paragraph of my briefing says:

"Current government pension policy means that in the long-term the situation will get worse rather than better."

I wonder where all the positivity comes from.

Ian Jenkins: I will find the document later. I do not want to stop right now, but I assure the member that the words are there. Mary Scanlon refers to Westminster pension policy, but I am talking about the Scottish Parliament.

Mary Scanlon: I was talking about Scottish Executive policy.

Ian Jenkins: No, the member did not say that.

The substantial policies that I described affect the fabric of the way in which many people live their lives.

It is important to improve information for the elderly. One of the briefing documents says that, in implementing the heating policy, the Eaga Partnership and others provided benefits advice. People who received that advice benefited hugely from understanding better their welfare benefits. Increased awareness of, and information about, benefits for older people is important.

Help the Aged's document says that the initiatives are a recognition of the value of older people, on which we must build. In our self-interest, it is important for politicians to value older people, because we must remember that more than 1 million voters are over 60 years old and that they form a quarter of the voters on the electoral roll. That group is much more likely to vote than other sectors of the population are, so we had better listen to it. We are supposed to be a listening Parliament and we have projects such as better government for older people and the Elder Voice in the Borders, which involves elder champions. We must listen to older people, otherwise we—or rather, other members—will be in electoral trouble.

That sector of the population has enormous clout in our country's economic life because of its spending power and the talent that it brings to the marketplace, the volunteering sector and other strands of economic life. In those wider terms, we must recognise older people's value to society as a whole. As members have said before, the fabric of our society depends on the voluntary sector in its professional sense and for its volunteers. In communities throughout the country, older people volunteer and are the mainstay of many clubs and societies that enhance our community life by creating interest and self-esteem in our communities and bringing music and sport to them.

I suspect that it is true of all political parties that many activists in our constituencies are close to, or over, retirement age. I remember an instance from the time that David Steel was last elected, when an old chap of about 92, who was a good party member, came to help at the election and ended up driving the old people to the poll. I promise members that that is a true story.

Today, we are debating the opportunity gap for older people. I agree with the lobbying organisations that the health and social services provisions for older people are high on the political agenda. I do not want to turn the debate into one about the health service, but I want to address one aspect that seems to be hugely important in a debate about opportunity gaps.

It is vital that audiology services should be at the top of our list of priorities. As members know from their postbags, there is a massive wish to expand the provision of high-quality hearing aids, which to most people means digital hearing aids. We cannot have a serious debate about closing the opportunity gap for older people if we allow older people to live their lives deprived of a sense that allows them to function fully. We have the means to improve their lives immeasurably and we need to make arrangements for those means to be provided.

One of the interesting statistics that I have read highlights the proportion of older people who are carers. Kenny Gibson mentioned that. We must turn our attention to providing proper respite facilities for the individuals whom they care for, to allow the older carers some respite from their undoubted burdens. Frank McAveety knows that I am interested in this subject. In saying that to him, I also congratulate him on having come to a solution with the care home people.

When we talk about respite facilities, I put in a plea for day care centres. I am connected to the Broomhill day centre in Penicuik. I hope that ministers will give serious consideration to making day care centres a statutory provision so that local authorities have to support those centres. To do so would address the voluntary nature of those vital centres and bring them from the edges of provision into the centre. Providing in any other way the facilities that are offered by day care centres would cost social services or the health service much more.

Our attention should be focused on the areas of education and lifelong learning. We must make it easier for people who have taken early retirement from a strenuous job, or who have been made redundant, to access opportunities for a change in employment, even in their later years. Supportive employers do not discriminate on age-related grounds. B&Q, which has famously established a policy of taking on older people, has benefited from that policy not only in publicity terms but by gaining the skills and experience that older people can bring to the workplace.

We are aware of current and forthcoming skills shortages across the country. We must ensure that training programmes are made available that will allow older people to qualify for the jobs that become available. We are short of tradespeople of all sorts and we are short of carers. There are desk jobs, for which people simply require training, and jobs in areas in which posts have traditionally gone to young people, such as catering and tourism.

There is no logical reason why things should be set in aspic. Colleges and training boards must make their programmes flexible, so that people can enter them without having to undertake five-year courses or do big blocks of stuff, but can get back into the workplace and feel useful and not excluded.

I hope that there will come a point in the McCrone agreement when the stepping down arrangements that are part of the agreement, but which have not yet been fully facilitated, come into operation. Those arrangements would allow teachers to ease out of full-time posts without damaging their pension rights. They could act as a model for other employment areas.

Lifelong learning opportunities should be provided for older people on a personal level. Older people come together for social reasons in clubs that are established to improve physical well-being and provide recreational activities such as bridge and painting. Older people are becoming interested in computing and working on the web. Such opportunities are increasingly becoming available in libraries and village halls, as well as in the homes of older people.

Activities that encourage fitness and broaden the mind have knock-on benefits for individuals and for society through the sense of well-being that they create. We save on other services as a result of people being fitter and happier in their ordinary lives.

I was going to mention pensions—

The Deputy Presiding Officer: You do not have a great deal of time, Mr Jenkins.

Ian Jenkins: There is a sense that pensions and benefits are a Westminster matter, but Scottish ministers must be interested in them and make their views known. There is a loss of faith in the whole pensions apparatus that will affect many people who are currently in work, but who will become older people, if they are lucky.

I want to conclude philosophically. I was an English teacher and am inclined to turn to poetry, much of which deals with older people. T S Eliot's "The Love Song of J Alfred Prufrock" features an individual who feels that he has not made much of his life. He has measured out his life with coffee spoons and recognises that he is never likely to break with convention. He says:

"I grow old ... I grow old ...
I shall wear the bottoms of my trousers rolled."

Jenny Joseph is intent on throwing over the traces:

"When I am an old woman I shall wear purple
With a red hat which doesn't go, and doesn't suit me.
And I shall spend my pension on brandy and summer gloves".

Dylan Thomas is even stronger:

"Do not go gentle into that good night,
Old age should burn and rave at close of day;
Rage, rage against the dying of the light."

However, my favourite poem in this context and for this occasion is the long poem "Ulysses" by Tennyson. The old king is tired of a dull life and determined that he must go for one last adventure. He says that he feels that he must go. He cannot stay making laws for people—he mentions doling out

"Unequal laws unto a savage race".

He says:

"I cannot rest from travel; I will drink
Life to the lees"

and adds:

"all experience is an arch wherethro'
Gleams that untravell'd world ...
How dull it is to pause, to make an end,
To rust unburnish'd, not to shine in use!"

He continues:

"And this gray spirit yearning in desire
To follow knowledge like a sinking star,
Beyond the utmost bound of human thought ...
my purpose holds
To sail beyond the sunset, and the baths
Of all the western stars, until I die."

He says that he will go out

"Made weak by time and fate, but strong in will
To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield."

As I prepare myself to sail into the sunset, I thank all my colleagues and friends from all parties and make it clear that I will be forever grateful to my constituents in Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale for giving me the opportunity to serve in this historic Parliament.

10:37

Trish Godman (West Renfrewshire) (Lab): Yesterday, when I said to my comrade, ally, colleague, and indeed sister, Johann Lamont, that I was going to speak in the debate, she immediately said that she hoped that I would declare an interest, which I do declare, as I am an older person. As it is the final plenary session, I will not say what the minister said to me this morning when I said that I was going to speak.

Colin Campbell and John Young have reminded me many times that, as Winnie Ewing is not returning after the election but I am, I will be the mother of the house. I will be pleased to be the mother of the house and follow Winnie Ewing. Perhaps I have experience to speak on the subject.

I am proud of the Scottish Executive's efforts to make the lives of older people more tolerable and secure. Free central heating, free personal care, free local bus travel—which is soon to be increased to free bus travel around Scotland—much-improved pensions and free television licences for those who are over 75 have been introduced.

However, I want to turn to older people who are activists in our communities in elderly forums. There are two such forums in my constituency—one in Erskine and one in Inverclyde, which I share with Duncan McNeil. Such people play a key role in campaigns for better pensions and safer communities and generally making life much more tolerable, although sometimes I wonder whether they make life more tolerable for politicians—each time that I see them, they do not miss and hit the wall, as they say. In the best sense, they are the trade union movement for older people; more than that, they engage actively with councillors, MSPs and MPs. We should listen attentively to those wise and sometimes sharp-tongued representatives of older people.

One of the finest of those representatives whom I have met was Jack Jones, who fought with the International Brigade in the Spanish civil war and went on to become the general secretary of the Transport and General Workers Union. I assure members that no minister dared to pull the wool over the sharp eyes of that senior citizen.

How do we define older people today? The minister mentioned the new deal 50 plus, which recognises that there are 50 year olds who are not working. For me—at the old age that I am—50 is not old; it is still young. There is a lot more to do.

It is right and proper that we care for older citizens, but what about those who are thrown on to the scrap heap in their 50s? No doubt members would be unhappy—they would be appalled—if their constituency parties told them, "You are too old at 50. A 21-year-old is keen to do this job and we think that they could do it better than you." That happens too often nowadays in all kinds of industries. In many occupations it makes sound economic sense to recruit, employ and retain older people. If we cannot appeal to employers' altruism, we should point out to them that they could do much worse than employ older people. As Ian Jenkins said, companies such as B&Q and Asda purposely employ older people, because of—among other things—the confidence that it gives to customers when they seek advice and help.

Much more needs to be done. It is absurd and hypocritical for people to argue for longer working lives, as they are doing in another place, when so many in their early 50s see only a life on social security payments and no prospect of change.

By all means support, respond and react to the genuine and legitimate concerns of elderly forums, Age Concern Scotland and other voluntary organisations, but at the same time let us do all that we can to ensure that people lead full working lives with good terms and conditions of employment.

10:42

Kay Ullrich (West of Scotland) (SNP): The debate, as we all know, coincides with the day that some of us head off into retirement and will ourselves soon be labelled as older people.

Anyone who was at Sir David Steel's dinner for retiring members last night would have to concede that we wrinklies still know how to party. By the sound of Ian Jenkins's speech, I do not think that he has been home yet.

Helen Eadie (Dunfermline East) (Lab): Ian Jenkins made a point about Saga. Does Kay Ullrich know that that stands for sex and games for the aged?

Kay Ullrich: I shall move swiftly on.

Four days after the election, I will be the proud possessor of, in one hand, my state pension book and, in the other, my Strathclyde bus pass. The world will, of course, become my oyster.

I do not expect to feel or look any different when I become 60 on 5 May, but I suspect that I will be treated differently. All the statistics indicate that I will experience age discrimination. It is important that this Parliament addresses the fact that age discrimination exists throughout our society.

Carers have been mentioned. Those people save the state £3.4 billion a year through their dedicated commitment, but what does the state do when they reach retirement age? It cancels their entitlement to invalid care allowance—no matter that thousands of pensioners remain often the sole carer of their adult disabled children. It is also worth noting that many pensioners now care for their elderly parents. Why does the Westminster Government choose to remove that benefit at the very time that a family's income is reduced because of retirement?

I will take a quick look at age discrimination in the health service. In hospitals around Scotland, older people are shunted from ward to ward and from bed to bed. That is done to make room for more acute patients. In 1999, there were about 1,800 delayed discharges. Today, at the end of the parliamentary session, there are more than 2,500. That is an increase of almost 40 per cent. The situation was bad in 1999, but it is even worse in 2003. To add insult to injury, those elderly people are commonly described as bedblockers, as if they deliberately languish in inappropriate acute wards in hospitals. We can and must do better.

Among the most disturbing reports on care of the elderly are those that reveal that up to 20 per cent of pensioners in hospitals are malnourished. The reason for that is simple—there are not enough nursing and auxiliary staff to assist frail elderly people to eat their meals. My mother was in such a situation, but, luckily, after a few days, another patient alerted me to the fact that my mum's meals were being removed untouched. That is no way in which to treat the elderly population. Those people have worked hard all their lives, they have put their bit into the public kitty and they have every right to be cared for with dignity and respect when their working lives are over.

The Parliament has the power and the will to improve the quality of life for the growing number of older people. We have shown that through what I consider to be the greatest achievement of the first four years of the Parliament—the introduction of free personal care for the elderly. We can all be justifiably proud of that achievement.

This is my last speech in the Parliament. I feel honoured and privileged to have served in the first Scottish Parliament in almost 300 years, but now is my time to say goodbye. I have made many friends from all parties and I will truly miss all members—I will even miss Duncan McNeil's cheery wee face.

Mr Duncan McNeil (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab): Thank you.

Kay Ullrich: As I am not as literate as the English teacher who preceded me in the debate, and as I am Ayrshire lass, I will end by paraphrasing Robert Burns. Nae man can tether time or tide; the hour approaches, Kay maun ride.

10:48

Bill Butler (Glasgow Anniesland) (Lab): I give my good wishes to the members who are leaving, but I hope that this is not my last speech in the Parliament.

The debate is an important one. My constituency of Glasgow Anniesland has the second highest proportion of retired citizens in Scotland and I have no hesitation in supporting the motion because I know that people in my constituency have benefited from the policies of the Labour-led Executive. Those policies recognise people's needs in areas that are fundamental to a civilised quality of life, which is every citizen's right.

From the bare statistics, it can be seen that the Executive, working in partnership with our colleagues in Westminster, has begun to make improvements to the life of retired citizens. The higher state pension, the winter fuel allowance and, from next autumn, the new pension credit will result in an average gain of £1,150 a year for such citizens. Those reforms are not the be-all and end-all; they are only the start of the process of making an impact on pensioner poverty. In absolute terms, pensioner poverty has fallen by 69 per cent and, in relative terms, it has fallen by 31 per cent, but the present situation is still an indictment of our society and illustrates the work that remains to be done to repair the 18 years of Tory destructiveness.

I contend that the Executive has made real achievements, which are a good beginning. I will focus on a number of initiatives that the Labour-led Executive has set in train and which I know, from talking to my constituents, have made a real difference. One such initiative was the decision to introduce free local off-peak bus travel for pensioners and disabled people from October last year. In partnership with councils all over Scotland, that policy has benefited more than a million of our fellow citizens. In my view, the £45 million that has been invested in that scheme is money well spent. It is a practical example of socialism in action.

I am delighted that my party has pledged to extend that scheme so that it encompasses the whole of Scotland. I hope that the people of Scotland allow us to develop the policy in the Parliament's second session. That is a logical development, and will prevent the teething problems that the present scheme has encountered, which many colleagues and I have raised in this chamber. Those teething problems were caused mainly by an overly bureaucratic and inflexible application of the guidelines relating to the scheme's boundaries.

The second area that I want to touch on is the work in progress on the series of measures that have been set in train by the Executive to combat the wholly unacceptable situation of older people being forced to endure life in cold, freezing homes. Westminster has played a part by reducing VAT on fuel from 8 per cent to 5 per cent, but the Executive has put in place the central heating programme and the warm deal. The result of that innovative approach is that, since April 2001, more than 10,000 pensioners throughout Scotland have received free central heating. As one of my constituents, who is perhaps a little older than me, said, "This is an absolute boon."

I am pleased that it is my party's clear intention to produce a situation where, by 2006, no local authority or housing association tenants, or anyone aged 60 or over, will have to live in a home without central heating or adequate insulation. For senior citizens who had to endure freezing homes during the Tory years of cuts and a lack of proper funding for local government, that is real progress. It is an example of socialism in work. Meeting the basic individual needs of people young and old is a prerequisite for the creation of a better society.

We are always advised not to quote Aneurin Bevan, but I am going to go against that advice, because he put it much better than I could, to the nth degree. In his book "In Place of Fear" he said:

"There is no test for progress other than its impact on the individual. If ... policies ... do not have for their object the enlargement and cultivation of the individual life, they do not deserve to be called civilised."

That was true in 1952 and it still applies today.

Free eye tests and TV licences, free personal and nursing care, better housing and an improving national health service, with an extra £3.2 billion to be invested over the next five years, are all worthwhile reforms that impact beneficially on individuals.

Tommy Sheridan: Does the member agree that the very socialist he mentioned, Aneurin Bevan, would have opposed tooth and nail the increased means testing that has been imposed on pensioners in this country?

Bill Butler: Let me put it this way: all those things do not represent the revolution that some of us may hope for, but they add up to a beginning, which will create a revolution in the quality of life of so many of our fellow citizens. As a socialist, one deals with the situation as it is, with the material conditions as they are, and not with what one might wish they could be in the most perfect possible situation. That is my contention and what I, as a reformist socialist, believe in.

I commend the Labour-led Executive's motion, which mirrors its approach over the past four years. That approach is palpable evidence of a good beginning and is worthy of continued support.

10:54

Mary Scanlon (Highlands and Islands) (Con): This is an oddly sad day, when we say goodbye to Kay Ullrich, John Young, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Ian Jenkins and, of course, that grand matriarch of Scottish politics, Dr Winnie Ewing. When I was in Shetland at the weekend, people said, as they do wherever I go in the Highlands, "How's Winnie doing? She used to come up here so often." One thing about proportional representation in European elections is that everyone knew that Winnie was the member of the European Parliament. Her reputation will continue.

We have heard so much about social inclusion in recent years, particularly in relation to older people. Many of the soundbites sound very good. Free personal care is free if one can get it. It is free if one can get out of hospital, as Kay Ulrich said. It is also free if one can wait long enough for it. Free personal care is free once someone has had a long wait for an assessment—up to 12 months, but sometimes longer. It is free once the care plan is drawn up, but the care plan can take several months. The care plan should not be a wish list; it should be the basis for the care and support that someone receives.

What is free, however, is the watered-down version of the care plan that gives someone the free personal care that the councils can afford and not the free personal care that is outlined in the care plan. I do not think that there is an MSP in the chamber who has not had someone visit their surgeries to say, "Here is my care plan and this is what I get." It must be the responsibility of Parliament to ensure that the legislation to which we sign up is in good faith. I sat through all the meetings of the Health and Community Care Committee, many of which Kay Ulrich contributed to and, in good faith, we thought that free personal care would be quite different from the free personal care for which people have to fight today.

Week by week in the Highlands, families are fighting for care for the elderly. A lady came to me last week and told me that she was forced to take her mother out of hospital and care for her at home. I saw her mother walking along the road and it was a tragic sight. That was reality, unlike the soundbites that we often hear from the Executive.

I have in my hand a pack from Aberdeen City Council. It is addressed to my colleague David Davidson and dated the end of October last year, which was four months after the implementation of free personal care. It says:

"The Eligibility Criteria for Community Care Services Review Group have been considering the revisal of the eligibility criteria and have made comparisons of the eligibility criteria with other local authorities, particularly those of Fife Council".

When the Parliament passed free personal care, we all assumed that there would be consistent standards throughout Scotland, but instead we have a pick and mix. Highland Council has already tried to change the eligibility criteria for free personal care to say that people in the Highlands should be more ill before they receive it. The same situation exists throughout Scotland. Thankfully, the motion lodged by the social work convener at Highland Council was voted down. However, we must ensure that when we pass legislation in the Parliament, every council in Scotland has the same commitment to it.

Whoever sits on the successor Health and Community Care Committee after 1 May must make a commitment to monitor the implementation of free personal care, but I ask the minister, too, to make that commitment. I do not doubt his good will, but I believe that he has a serious monitoring role to ensure that pensioners throughout Scotland get consistent access to free personal care.

The Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care (Mr Frank McAveety): Does the member accept that the legislation is clear and that the guidelines provided indicate that people should be assessed for free personal care and then allocated such care according to the services of local authorities? Does she also accept that there is no need for local authorities to introduce waiting lists because the resources and the legislation exist, as is right and proper?

Mary Scanlon: Yes. In fact I have found the minister supportive when I took information to him and highlighted my concerns. We all have a responsibility to do that where local authorities are writing their own guidelines that are quite different from the legislation we pass in Parliament.

The Aberdeen City Council pack to which I referred mentions high priority, medium priority and low priority. The council also admits:

"You may be placed onto a waiting list for the provision of some services."

It also says:

"we are unable to guarantee a particular type or level of service will always be available."

At least Aberdeen City Council is honest. I am happy to pass on the pack from the council because its implementation is not the same as the guidelines that were set by the Parliament. However, I must ask whether the council has heard of free personal care. There is no mention in the document of the free personal care provisions that were passed by the Parliament. I am pleased to hear the minister's commitments in that regard.

Free personal care should be applied consistently throughout Scotland. There should not be postcode provision. It should not be dependent on individual councils' priorities. As Kay Ullrich said, the number of beds blocked is over 2,700. When the Scottish Parliament was set up, however, only 1,700 beds were blocked. From his time on the Health and Community Care Committee, the minister will remember when Professor Mary Marshall told us that the condition of elderly people deteriorates considerably when they are held in hospital and are given inappropriate care.

Lewis Macdonald knows a lot about free bus travel, but I will tell him about the situation in the Highlands. Someone who lives in Nairn can travel to Inverness, Fort William or Wick for free, but cannot cross the boundary into Grampian to go to Forres or Elgin. Many people in Nairn have a greater commitment to those two towns than they do to what they might term the wild west of the Highlands. In response to a parliamentary question on this matter that was asked by David Davidson, Lewis Macdonald said:

"The decision on whether to offer this benefit, however, is for the local transport authority to make in relation to each particular scheme."—[Official Report, Written Answers, 18 February 2003; p 3010.]

I understand that, but the minister cannot stand in this chamber and say that there will be free travel for the elderly and leave it to local operators to decide what is free and what is not free.

Dr Sylvia Jackson (Stirling) (Lab): Can I take it that, in order to ensure that the scheme is a national scheme, Mary Scanlon will be voting Labour in the election?

Mary Scanlon: No chance. I realise that Sylvia Jackson is desperate for votes, but she should not come chapping on my door.

Although, as Ian Jenkins said, pensions are a Westminster issue, I will mention the fact that Help the Aged's briefing, in a section entitled "Creating Tomorrow's Pensioner Poverty Today", criticises the stakeholder pensions. It also says that 72 per cent of final salary schemes have stopped accepting new members, that there is a £27 million black hole in pension provision and that the state pension is diminishing in value. According to Help the Aged, things are not getting better for pensioners; they are getting worse.

11:02

Donald Gorrie (Central Scotland) (LD): On behalf of the young at heart, regardless of age, I would like to discuss employment and volunteering.

I should probably declare an interest in that, if I make a persuasive speech about the need to employ older people and am successful in the election, Jim Wallace might give me a job.

None of us thinks that anyone should have to work after the normal retirement age if they do not want to. However, we should be far more flexible in helping people to continue to work longer if they want to and are up to it. Winston Churchill was a pensioner when he led Britain to salvation in the 1940s. [Applause.] The Conservative members who just applauded might not like my next example as much, but Gladstone was in his 80s when he took on the establishment to try to secure Irish home rule. He used to speak for one, two or three hours on the subject in Parliament. I assure members that I will stick to four minutes, however.

Closer to home, I mention our two oldest members, Winnie Ewing and John Young. They have long and distinguished records of public service in Scotland, which have continued right up to the present time. Age is no impediment. We should do more to change people's attitudes.

If we are of a pensionable age and wish to continue, there are three tests. First, are we physically up to what we want to do? Secondly, do we continue to enjoy it? Certainly, I do, as do many other members; I go home happily if I have contributed a little to some local issue and helped constituents. If I have nudged the parliamentary process to support some cause I am interested in—even if I have just annoyed a Government department—that has been a good day. Thirdly, we need honest advice from our nearest and dearest as to whether we have lost the plot.

In other words, health, enjoyment and still being mentally up to it are the important factors. The Executive could lead by example; it could have much more liberal employment policies to allow people to continue working. In my brief time as an MP, I tried to help people who were losing their jobs at the Scottish Office, allegedly because of their age, although they were very keen to continue. We should also encourage Scottish employers to be liberal and flexible as regards employing older people.

The other aspect is volunteering. Again, we do not wish to compel people to volunteer; it is their choice. However, many people feel inhibited from volunteering, and we could do far more to inform them. For example, there could be a simple rule that all charities and voluntary organisations had to have a two-page summary of their activity, which would be part of the monitoring process, but would also be available on the web and in paper format in local libraries. People could then find out about voluntary organisations that they could work for. We could also give more training to help people. The fiercest and most determined organiser of voluntary activity I know is over retirement age, and two of the most valuable treasurers I have known have also been of that age. Treasurers are probably more valuable to an organisation than anything else. Therefore, if we can help local organisations to attract and train volunteers and to become better known, we will have done everyone a great favour.

Ian Jenkins finished his excellent speech with my favourite piece of poetry about Ulysses going on one more voyage. As a politician hoping to get into one more Parliament, he has expressed what I feel. I am happy to leave it at that.

11:08

Colin Campbell (West of Scotland) (SNP): I suppose I must declare an interest. When I was coming up the road, David Davidson told me that he supposed that I would be speaking today. I asked, "Why is that?" and he replied, "On grounds of antiquity."

No one has tried to define older people. It is funny—the young people in the gallery probably think that older people are 30. When someone is 30, they think that old is 45, and when they are my age, they might think 80. When I am 80—as I fully intend to be, God willing and weather permitting—I shall think that 95 is old.

Age is partly a state of mind, as other members have commented; I must admit that it is also a state of deteriorating body. That said, there are many older people who are far fitter, mentally and physically, than young people. Although there is a common condition among older people known as a senior moment—alternatively, a CRAFT moment, which I will explain later but cannot possibly say here—such fleeting seconds of forgetfulness are not the exclusive province of older people. I suppose that the only definition has to be chronological. I have been in denial on this for years, but my imminent departure has forced me to face up to it.

What is the opportunity gap? People are prevented from working beyond a certain age, and are not selected for jobs because they are too old. We should follow the example of the United States, where people work as long as they want to and as long as they are fit and well for the job. That is what Donald Gorrie said, and I agree. Older people who lose their jobs in their 50s or early 60s are not getting retrained quickly enough. For those who do not want to leave, or who are not at the end of their salary career, that is a demoralising experience.

I have looked at Age Concern Scotland's manifesto for the forthcoming election. It highlights a number of points that Age Concern feels to be worthy of consideration. Those include defects in service delivery in the national health service, in care services, in housing, in support from voluntary services, in consultation and in transport.

I will focus, however, on the need to ensure that enterprise and lifelong learning policies are fully inclusive of older people's needs. That means that vocational retraining must be readily accessible everywhere for everyone, where they need it. Non-vocational studies and courses must be available for people who no longer wish to continue to work. The two benefits of that are, first, that it enriches those people's lives—people's lives should be as rich as they can be for as long as possible.

Helen Eadie: I have a 101-year-old constituent who is going to learn computing at the Bowhill centre in Cardenden. I am sure that Colin Campbell will join me in recognising the real value that that represents.

Colin Campbell: I could not possibly disagree with Helen Eadie in this instance. That is just great and really good to know.

The second benefit of people taking non-vocational courses after they leave work is that they can share their life's experience with the other people on the course, and with the staff. Not only does that educate other people, it is good for their own self-esteem.

To give the people in this nation the best possible lives, we need to control all the levers of power. To discuss this in a devolved Parliament that is devoid of power over income tax, social security, pensions and the economy is a bit like whistling in the wind. To close the opportunity gap for older people—and indeed for all our people—Scotland needs to release the great wealth of Scotland for all the people of Scotland. That can be done only by delivering independence. That is why I joined the Scottish National Party—that is why we all joined our party—and that is why our party will be here until after independence day.

And now for my valedictory paragraph. Unlike Ian Jenkins, who used to be an English teacher, I am an historian to trade, and there will be no poetry in this. It has been a responsibility, an honour and a privilege to serve in the first democratically elected Scottish Parliament. Its cross-party committee system, with its pre-legislative scrutiny, proves that a one-chamber assembly can work. The consensus that is arrived at in the committees and often, on the really good days, in the chamber, represents the very best of Scottish politics. More than that, although we disagree radically on a number of things—not least independence, over which we will argue until independence day—we conduct our political lives tolerantly and with mutual respect, so much so that foreign parliamentarians have been beating a path to the Parliament since we opened, to see how we do it so well. Sometimes, we do not get enough credit in this country for what we have achieved. The Parliament is a bit like a prophet without honour in his own country. Somebody once said that devolution is not a destination, but a process. The inevitable outcome of that process will be independence for this nation. I am proud to have played my part in that process on behalf of all the people of Scotland.

11:13

Mr David Davidson (North-East Scotland) (Con): I am sorry that Mrs Curran is not in the chamber at the moment to get something back—we heard a good lecture from her earlier. I have no declaration to make for the debate, unlike some of my colleagues. If we ever wish to look for value for money from the older generation, it was John Young in the karaoke bar last night.

I am amazed at the Executive's hypocrisy in securing this debate at the last possible moment of the session. It could not have got the debate in any later if it had tried. That is how much the Executive prioritises the needs of our older generation, and that is the signal that it is sending out. The Executive should be ashamed that it has taken so long to bring this subject to the chamber.

Under the Labour Government, particularly under Gordon Brown, there has been an increase in stealth taxes that cannot be avoided. Those taxes hit pensioners and those who are not on benefit particularly badly. This is the new poverty trap, and it puts people just above the benefit level. Savings have been attacked. The savings index is down, which does not bode well for the future, so God knows how we will pay for taxes, pensions and so on in future.

Gordon Brown has singled out the one area in which people can be self-reliant: the tax on the pensions system. People save up and want to be proud and have their independence and dignity, as Keith Harding rightly said. The Labour Government has destroyed that in the interest of getting money into the pot, regardless of where it comes from. That is a scandal that the next—Conservative—Government will have to address. We have little doubt that that will not be too far in the offing, despite Lewis Macdonald's smirking. I say to him that merely giving people bus passes is no substitute for giving them choice and dignity in their old age.

The new poverty zone has taken a lot from our older generation. We are all knocking on doors at the moment, and we all speak to older people. What do they talk to us about? They talk about the cost of government, their lack of purchasing power with the money that they have left, how they have to eke out a living, and how their pensions have not increased in line with inflation. Yet, council after council has inflicted massive council tax rises in the past six years. There is not a council in Scotland that has done anything to reduce council tax increases to the level of inflation. Aberdeenshire council, where I live, has managed to put it up by 63 per cent in a few years.

Who do those increases hit worst of all? They hit those who do not have an opportunity to earn a living and whose pensions are eroded. It is a fact of life that the stock market goes up and down. However, the value of those annuities that were meant to mature in the past two years has probably gone down by 40 to 45 per cent. People's hopes, aspirations and savings have been destroyed, and the Labour Government does not recognise that.

It is amazing—Mrs Curran has actually come in to the chamber. Once again, she is not giving her whole-hearted attention to a serious debate.

Ms Curran: That is not fair.

Mr Davidson: It is perfectly fair. Mrs Curran brought this debate, late, to the Parliament and she should sit here and listen, particularly since we had lectures from her this morning.

Free personal care is a joke. The document that I gave to Mary Scanlon is proof positive that the councils of Scotland do not have the Scottish Executive's support in delivering free personal care. About eight councils have issued public policy statements in which they state very clearly that there is no national scheme. Instead, there is postcode availability of free personal care, which is a disgrace. The amount of money that the Parliament has received to spend has gone up and up, but what do we see for it? As far as the older generation is concerned, we do not see a great deal.

I am pleased that the Scottish Executive has rejected the Office of Fair Trading report on pharmacy services. I give the Executive credit for that and am glad that I was able to help Frank McAveety through some of the technical issues involved. In this case, at least, the Executive has managed to get the answer right. I am pleased that people in rural and suburban communities will now be able to access pharmaceutical care. I declare that I no longer have any interest in community pharmacy.

The Executive has been late to the table on this subject: it could not have scheduled this debate any later. That is a clear signal to the pensioners of Scotland that they are not in the front line of the Scottish Executive's concerns.

11:19

Paul Martin (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab): Like other speakers, I pay my respects to the retiring members and wish them the very best. I look forward to my retirement—hopefully, in 29 years' time, after a career serving as the MSP for Glasgow Springburn.

Credit should be given to the Executive where it is due. Like other members, I am sometimes critical of the Executive, but I commend it for its response to the pharmacy report. It has listened to the wide range of members' views. The pharmacy issues are very important to the older people in our communities as pharmacies provide a valuable service and the Executive has taken that into consideration.

I see this debate as an opportunity to promote many of the services that we have delivered. I also see it as an opportunity to consider how we improve older people's experiences in our communities. I put on record my appreciation of the army of home helps and care workers and other key staff who provide a valuable service in supporting the older people in our communities. I also give recognition to the alive and kicking project in my constituency, which provides a valuable service to the elderly.

The experience of many of my elderly constituents appears to be patchy, particularly when they have inquiries about council tax, utilities, housing benefit or other issues to which members have referred. Older people face what is almost a web of secrecy about how their inquiries are dealt with. I ask the Minister for Social Justice—I make a constructive point here—whether she will consider a one-stop-shop approach to support elderly people with the inquiries with which they encounter difficulties. As a Glasgow MSP, the minister will be aware of some of the council tax inquiries that our elderly constituents have and the difficulties that they face with how such inquiries are managed. We have many examples of one-stop-shop approaches in our communities and such an approach to support the elderly with their inquiries would be a way forward.

I referred to the alive and kicking project. The ethos of that project is that one is never too old. The project has set up an informal dating agency—if any retired members are interested—and many of the people involved have married later in life, such as Rose and Benny Walker, the founder members of the project. Their ethos is that one is never too old for many of the activities in which they are involved. That is the kind of ethos that we should develop in the Parliament. We should not allow our elderly people to be confined to day rooms and day facilities. They should be involved in the kinds of activities that the project has developed over the past 20 years. I put on record my appreciation, as the local MSP, for the hard work that has been done. I plead with the Executive to consider investing in and developing such services.

The main thing is to ensure that we build on that for the future. Shortly, I will be joined by children from St Stephen's Primary School in my constituency. As Colin Campbell said, those are the young people who see us all, perhaps including me, at 36 years of age, as old guys. We should lay the foundations to ensure that when those pupils are older, services are in place to ensure that they will have a good life in their later years.

11:24

Alex Neil (Central Scotland) (SNP): Like many other members, I take the opportunity to wish those who are retiring today all the best for the future. I particularly say a word or two about my colleague Winnie Ewing, because she has the unique record of having served in three Parliaments. She opened this Parliament—the first democratically elected Scottish Parliament—and she has been not only a great parliamentarian and patriot, but has become an icon for the people of Scotland. I congratulate her and wish her all the best.

I could go round the chamber singling out many other people, but I want to mention only one other person. We should put on record our gratitude for the huge contribution that Henry McLeish made to the introduction of free personal care for the elderly. We wish Henry all the best in the future.

As one of the younger speakers in the debate—

Christine Grahame (South of Scotland) (SNP): I was waiting for the joke.

Alex Neil: For members who were not here, I mentioned in yesterday's debate on the economy that I read the Toothill report way back in 1962, while I was in my pram. I received a query from the official report, which asked me to clarify what I was flicking through in my pram. I hope that the official report keeps a copy of that note for future reference.

I want to discuss the pensions crisis that we face in Scotland and in the rest of the UK. Before I do that, I want to underline the points that have been made about the threat to our pharmacies. For many older people, the pharmacy is the focal point. It is not only where they collect prescriptions; in many cases, it is where they meet their friends. They often rely on the local chemist for advice, which might be on a variety of local issues, as well as on their health. We must unite in fighting any threat to our local pharmacies.

Mr McAveety: I will keep the member up to speed with events. Yesterday, we announced that we have rejected the OFT recommendation and that we value the role of community pharmacies across Scotland.

Alex Neil: I was just about to congratulate Frank McAveety on doing that.

Mr McAveety: I just like to hear it twice.

Alex Neil: As far as older people—and many others—are concerned, the other great institution is the local post office. It is regrettable that the threat to urban and, in the longer term, to rural post offices is still with us. That is of major concern to older people.

I turn to the key issue of pensions. Many of the aspirations that Margaret Curran outlined in her speech are aspirations that we all share, not just for those who are retired at the moment, but for those who will retire in the years to come. A key prerequisite—the fundamental principle that must be fulfilled before anyone can genuinely enjoy their retirement—is the guarantee that they will get a decent weekly income on which to enjoy it.

Any pensioner who lives on, or near, the poverty line and who relies on a pittance of a pension—the minimum income guarantee is more minimum than income—cannot enjoy their retirement, mix with their friends, go for a pint or do the things that people want to do when they have the time to do them. One of the most disgraceful measures that the Thatcher Government introduced was the breaking of the link between the annual increase in the pension and the increase in earnings rather than prices. If that link had been maintained, many pensioners would be up to £30 a week better off than they are.

Alex Johnstone (North-East Scotland) (Con): Does the member accept that, at the time at which that link was broken, the historical perspective indicated that pensioners had been at a massive disadvantage because that change had not been made earlier?

Alex Neil: The bottom line is that the breaking of the link between the pension and earnings has cost pensioners about £1,500—at today's prices—every year. The same is true of the Christmas bonus, which, to be fair, the Tories introduced. Initially, it was worth £10, but now it is worth only £1.25—about 10 per cent of its original value.

I have not had time to develop all the other aspects of the pensions crisis. My basic point is that paying lip service to the pensioners is fine, but if it ain't matched with resources, that is all it is—lip service. We must guarantee that every pensioner has a decent income, so that they can enjoy their retirement.

11:29

John Young (West of Scotland) (Con): A couple of weeks ago, my six-and-a-half-year-old granddaughter asked me, "Have you ever met Queen Victoria?" I sort of looked at her and asked, "Do you not mean the Queen?" She said, "No, Queen Victoria." I must admit that I think that she was put up to it.

One important thing that has not been mentioned in the debate so far is the lack of communication between the elderly and the young. For a number of reasons, there was far more communication between the old and the young 30 or 40 years ago, when large numbers of people were employed in the same firm and people came through apprenticeships. Apprentices would start quite young and would be in contact with people who were in their 30s, 40s, 50s, 60s and even beyond.

I started as an office boy at 16 years of age. In those days, it was not possible to be promoted beyond an office boy until it was seen whether the call came for national service at the age of 18. I recall that our office had not only the likes of myself who was 16, but two men who were over 70 years of age. One of them was the head clerk, who had started as an office boy in the same firm when Queen Victoria was in the last few years of her reign. There was that mix between the young, the middle-aged and the old.

Under national service, a large chunk of the male population saw that mix. The 18 and 19-year-olds had to meet corporals and sergeants who would be in their 20s, 30s and 40s. Because all those things have largely disappeared, a type of division has occurred.

We set down certain age markers, such as 60 and 65, but we should bear it in mind that at the beginning of the 20th century only about 60 people in this country were reckoned to have reached 100 years of age, whereas today almost 6,000 people are reckoned to come within that category. Again, world heavyweight boxing champions such as Jack Dempsey tended to retire at 31 years of age. In the past few years, people such as Riddick Bowe have fought for the same title at 45 years of age. Colonel Glenn, who was latterly a senator, went back into space at 77 years of age. We perhaps require new markers for age.

I think that it would be useful if a future Scottish Parliament reserved eight seats. Four would be for people over 65 years of age who would be appointed for one year on a rotating system. The other four seats would go to people under 21 years of age, again for one year only on a rotating system. That would be a useful exercise, which could be done outwith the mainstream elections.

We have heard all sorts of contributions today and I thank Donald Gorrie for his kind remarks. I think that the next Parliament should establish a poet laureate and Ian Jenkins would be the obvious man for that job. It might be a new departure to have such a thing in a Scottish Parliament.

Finally, a number of years ago in the United States, the Republican and Democrat parties recognised the value of what they called grey power as a huge voting block. There is the possibility that grey power in this country will become more organised as a voting block that any politician ignores at their peril. If a mass of grey-power people come together, they will be able to decide the outcome of not only Scottish Parliament elections, but Westminster elections.

On that happy note, it remains only for me to thank everybody for their kind wishes for the future. I have no intention of simply putting my slippers on, or of watching the afternoon television and all that sort of nonsense. I hope to participate in politics in another direction. I will perhaps consider writing up my experiences of the first four years of the Scottish Parliament.

I was one of the few Conservatives who wanted a Scottish Parliament when we had the declaration of Perth in the 1970s. One man who I am sad to see did not make it here is Brian Meek, the Edinburgh town councillor and journalist. Brian is a fund of knowledge and has been a staunch supporter of the Scottish Parliament, but he is still languishing down the road at Edinburgh City Chambers. Perhaps he will make it here yet.

I thank members very much. I have made good friends across the political spectrum. However, members have not seen the last of me. I will pay the occasional visit to Edinburgh and I may even lead grey-power marches down to Holyrood if members do not behave themselves. Be warned. [Applause.]

11:34

Dorothy-Grace Elder (Glasgow) (Ind): Many visions have floated across our radar today. My favourite, and the point at which I really got the giggles, was when Alex Neil referred to reading various documents while in his pram. My vision was of Alex Neil sitting in his pram, dribbling mush down his bib and thinking, "I have got to like mush. When I grow up, I think I will go into politics." A bonnie fechter is Alex Neil.

I am glad that Margaret Curran and Frank McAveety are the two ministers in charge today. The three of us have been sandwiched together in the east end for the past four years and, putting all party politics aside, both of them have co-operated with good heart and good grace on constituency issues, and have been friendly and kind at all times. Yes, even Frank McAveety—I had to put that on the record.

I am one of those leaving the Parliament, but I am certainly not retiring, even if it is my silver wedding anniversary this year. I will retire when someone nails down my box—be there. Campaigns will go on, especially the chronic pain campaign, which is one that affects older people. I know that Mary Scanlon and others who have been loyal to that campaign will continue it, as will the interest of members across all parties.

I will get to the nitty-gritty of age. I am old enough to remember when the Registrar General for Scotland produced a report entitled "The population of Scotland broken down by age and sex". Obviously we could take our pick which we wanted to be broken down by, fellow parliamentarians.

I am not sure what we mean when we talk in this debate about "older people" or "old people". By the standards of the Bundestag in Germany, everyone in the Scottish Parliament is older or old, even our youngest member who is still in his 20s. Recently, a girl of 19—a member of the Green party—was elected to the Bundestag.

Although talent occurs at any age, it is a formidable combination when talent is united with experience. I am terribly sorry to see some members leaving today, especially the unique Winnie Ewing. We are losing our mother, and that is awful for the Parliament.

The minister briefly referred to unemployment among older people. A survey by Silicon Research Services stated that agist discrimination begins at 35 nowadays. That is what was found in a survey of several thousand people.

Those of us who have marched together have tackled all forms of discrimination over the years. I know many faces from those past days. We marched against racism and sexism, but we have yet to tackle the last big, horrible ism and that is ageism.

The Eden Brown employee survey of October 2001 showed that employees found discrimination at work on the basis of age was much more common than discrimination on grounds of gender or race. We can see clearly why that is—there is legislation on race and gender discrimination.

In 1996, Mr Blair promised in writing to the campaign against age discrimination in employment that he would legislate against age discrimination. Strangely enough, after the election, he did not and it has been worked on a voluntary basis, which most certainly has not worked with employers.

An NOP survey found that half of employers had work forces with fewer than 10 per cent of employees over age 50 and 10 per cent of employers had no employees aged over 50. That is a disgraceful waste of human life and I am sure that everyone in the chamber will agree on that and agree that we have to move against ageism in future, whether the subject is devolved or not.

I will leave the chamber with some final thoughts. What is the Executive's own employment policy? One Executive document states that it does not usually employ people who are over 60, while the next reassures everyone that the Executive is against all forms of discrimination, including age discrimination. As a result, I ask the minister to spell out in his summing-up whether the Executive truly sets a good example or whether it debars people who are over 60.

I think that it should be illegal for any employer to ask someone about their age. I adhere to the view of Joan Rivers, who calculated her age according to the Hollywood movie star school of creative mathematics and then said anything she damned well liked about it. She was quite right, too. In fact, I recommend everyone to count their age in dog years.

I thank all members who have been friendly, co-operative and civilised over the past four years.

Ms Curran: I am sorry to intervene in the final minute. However, I want to put on record my recognition of Dorothy-Grace Elder's hard work both in the Parliament and in the east end of Glasgow. I had been debating whether to intervene on other members but, given my proximity to Dorothy-Grace and the work that we have done together in the east end of the city, I wanted to record on behalf of myself and Frank McAveety our recognition of her efforts.

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Mr Murray Tosh): You do not need to respond at great length, Ms Elder.

Dorothy-Grace Elder: Oh, go on.

The minister's comment was exceedingly kind. I know that she will work on and perhaps take on the Carntyne incinerator case. If I can help with anything, I certainly will. I have found out in politics that what counts are individuals, irrespective of party. Margaret Curran has been a staunch supporter of people when they have needed help.

I want to finish by thanking the people who really created this Parliament from scratch: the staff. We have been privileged. They have possibly had custody of the brain throughout; indeed, fronted by our marvellous security staff, they have done everything possible in every department for us. To all of them I say, goodbye and good luck. [Applause.]

11:42

Christine Grahame (South of Scotland) (SNP): I send my best wishes to all the retirees, in particular Dorothy-Grace Elder, whose passion and wit I will miss, and Dr Winnie Ewing, who was my political mentor for many years and remains so. I also give my best wishes to Ian Jenkins, who has been my sweet and dear adversary—or perhaps I have been his. I will cheer him up with the news that, in a recent questionnaire, Borders schoolchildren thought that I was a member of the Liberal Democrats. I have obviously mentioned them once too often.

Listening to the debate, I have been wondering who these older people are. Colin Campbell was quite right: it all depends on one's position on the timeline of life. I think that I am pretty young, although I am sure that lots of people think that I am no spring chicken and wonder why I am still here. Well, I intend to be here for a very long time.

For the purposes of many organisations, older people are classed as those who are over 50—which takes in my sweet young man Alex Neil. More than 1 million people in Scotland are over 50—indeed, one can hear them casting their votes based on what we have or have not done for them. Age Concern Scotland's slogan is "Age counts". We should all watch the ballot boxes to find out how politicians have let down Scotland's elderly.

We are not monotypical; we are all different and difficult and have all the usual virtues and vices. We are not simply older people. For example, my father is 88 on 1 April. He e-mails me his message list, but even that does not guarantee that I will come back with the right type of cabbage. He is truly an individual.

As we grow older, we rely more on public transport. To quote a famous film, I do not think that we should rely on "the kindness of strangers". We need public transport and a reliable health service and have to know that, when all is done, there is proper nursing care. As far as transport is concerned, mobility is at the heart of keeping one's health, psychological well-being and friends. Free bus passes might be all right, but they work only in one's own area. Someone in Penicuik can go to Leadburn, which is a couple of miles up the road, but if they want to go to Peebles, they must pay £4.50.

The Deputy Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning (Lewis Macdonald) rose—

Christine Grahame: I will take the minister's intervention in a minute. I hope that he is on his feet to announce that the Executive will make the scheme national, as we have suggested all along. We are behind Wales and a national scheme is needed.

Lewis Macdonald: I would have been delighted to announce that had my colleagues not made such an announcement some weeks ago. Having caught up with that fact, Christine Grahame will want to pay close attention to the matter. The difference between our commitment to a nationwide scheme and whatever the SNP has to say is that we will deliver our scheme.

Christine Grahame: The minister got there—better late than never. At least the scheme has got there; some buses do not get there. There is no point in having a free bus pass if no buses operate. In Galashiels in the Borders, Meigle Street loses all its buses on 31 March. Many elderly people who live up the hills will have nothing after that and they will knock on Scottish Borders Council's door. The bus services for those who live in Ladywood in Penicuik stop at 7.30 pm. People are supposed to be in bed with their knitted bedsocks on and are not supposed to be out gallivanting, doing internetting business and meeting friends.

Many older people are frightened to go into hospital because they think that doing so will make their health worse. Their operations might be successful, but they might catch infections while in hospital. My colleague Kay Ullrich mentioned a situation that I saw when my mother was terminally ill in hospital two years ago. Food trays that are put in front of patients have cups with lids that older people cannot open and the trays are taken away before the food has been eaten. Not a nurse is in sight to help those people to eat their meals. Some kind of resolution has been reached to the nursing home crisis, but elderly people and their families have been put through trouble in thinking that elderly people would be decanted and shifted like bits of furniture.

Growing old is not always a happy prospect, but I intend to grow old disgracefully. I will take a line from a poem that Ian Jenkins quoted: I shall "learn to spit".

Ian Jenkins: I think that Christine Grahame does that well already.

Christine Grahame: I also intend to hone my skill at drinking malt while gardening.

There is fun at 50—I know, I have been there; there is sex at 60—I hope so, I am going there; there is sin at 70, and I am looking forward to it; and at 80 and 90, there is upholstery. If members want to know the answer to that conundrum, they should read a previous speech of mine.

11:47

Sarah Boyack (Edinburgh Central) (Lab): I am tempted to say, "Follow that." I will try not to.

It is appropriate that the last main political debate of the session is about what the Parliament has done to try to improve older people's quality of life. In her opening speech, Margaret Curran made wide-ranging comments about what the Executive has done. I will focus not on a range of issues, but on how much more we need to do on the key flagship policies that define what the Parliament has done for older people and on the contribution that older people make in my constituency. It will probably be tough to cover those subjects in four minutes, but I will have a go.

In considering how to improve the key flagship policies that are delivered throughout Scotland, I asked my intern, Beth Shatzel, to undertake questionnaire work and to talk to older people in my constituency. Week in, week out in the Parliament, we debate policies endlessly, but how do those policies feed through to people? How do they know that those policies are being implemented?

We examined the three key policies of free off-peak local bus travel, free care for older people and free central heating. Through Beth Shatzel's work, which I followed up by attending many meetings of older people, it is clear that those policies have massive support throughout my constituency. Many older people have benefited from those policies, but many are still unaware of them. In the Parliament, we talk about the policies as if they were implemented at the flick of a switch, happened yesterday and are straightforward. We must communicate to older people what we have done in the Parliament, engage them in those discussions and talk to them about how to improve those policies.

When I talk to people in my constituency, just about every older person whom I meet is delighted about free off-peak local travel on buses. People have used it from day one—they have been delighted to get out there. People are not only using the scheme, but are massively aware of it. We have been hugely successful in making people know about free off-peak local travel on buses.

There is less awareness of what free care for older people means in practice and, as I said, it is incumbent on MSPs to communicate what policies mean in practice. Many older people whom we talked to had had free central heating installed, but many of them were suspicious about it. I was struck by the fact that they did not believe that it was going to be free. We have debated the issue in the Parliament—we know that free central heating is provided free and that the scheme is real. However, a lot of the older people whom we talked to thought that there was a catch; they thought that the scheme was something like a time-share. They said that bits of it would be free, but that they would have to pay for the installation or that there would be a catch further down the line and that 10 years hence they would have to pay for it.

It is important that we do not simply talk about those headline policies but take on the job of communicating them personally. A lot of flak has been directed at the Executive for the money that it has spent on advertising. As an ex-minister, I know that that is partly because a lot of that money used to be UK money. The Scottish Office did not have that money in its accounts and one of the benefits of devolution is that, when that money came to Scotland, we were given the choice about how to spend it.

I defend to the last the right of our Executive to spend money on publicity. I want every one of my constituents to know that they deserve and will benefit from free central heating. I have visited several old people's houses and have seen the difference that free central heating has made to their quality of life. I was struck by the fact that those old people no longer have to live their lives in their sitting rooms; they can be comfortable in their bedrooms and bathrooms as well. Those are basic things that the Scottish Parliament has done to make a difference and we should defend them to the last.

Although we have made a big difference in this parliamentary session, I would be the first to say that there is a hell of a lot more that we want to do in the second session. I would love to be in the Parliament then to extend those policies and to take them further forward.

It is important that we do not see older people only as receivers of benefit or policies from the Scottish Parliament. Older people put a huge amount back into our constituencies and communities. As a local MSP, I am proud of the work that older people do in my constituency. They demand my support on planning issues, on sourcing grants and on getting the local authority to give them more support. They also demand my support in getting new facilities built and in the fundraising that is needed to staff the facilities.

Many of the groups on my patch are run by older people, often for older people. It is important that we acknowledge that in today's debate, which is about closing the opportunity gap. The Scottish Parliament is making its contribution to that aim not only by spending money on older people, but by working with older people. We are making the work that older people do go a lot further—we should celebrate the work that is done by thousands of older people in every constituency across Scotland.

I will finish by saying that we have done a huge amount to make a real difference to the quality of life for pensioners and older people across Scotland. For the past year and a half, I have been involved in the Pennell trust—[Laughter.] I am going to regret saying that. The initiative is about women aged over 45 to over 105. Older people make up a huge number of the population of Scotland and we all know that we are all moving towards old age. We can be proud of what the Parliament has done so far, but I accept that there is an awful lot more than we still want to do. There are a lot of radical ambitions for the second session of the Parliament. I fervently hope that we will have a Labour-led Government to let us deliver those radical ambitions.

11:54

Ms Sandra White (Glasgow) (SNP): The minister said at the beginning of her speech that we have to listen to older people. The SNP does that and when we do so the one issue that is raised all the time, particularly by pensioners, is the state pension.

The state pension gives single people £75.50 and a couple £120.70 a week. There is the minimum income guarantee, but surely if it is described as a minimum the Government must be saying that a top-up is necessary. That means that the state pension is far too low. We must get to European levels—in Germany and France, the state pension is 11 per cent of the gross domestic product, whereas in the UK it is 4.3 per cent. The Scottish Parliament cannot get away from the fact that the state pension is far too low.

Today's debate is about closing the opportunity gap. One way of doing so is, as others have suggested, to encourage and allow people who want to get back to work to do so. We know that age discrimination legislation will come into force in 2006, but I am worried that most employers and people in Scotland do not know about it. When I attended a conference in Glasgow on the subject a couple of weeks ago, Scottish employers' lack of knowledge of it was mentioned time and again. Wales and England are far ahead of us on the issue. One reason for that is that we are not promoting the legislation enough. I think that it was Iain Gray who replied to my questions on the matter, for which I thank him. He mentioned the publication of a booklet called "Are You Over 50?" How many of those booklets have been produced? Where are they being distributed? Who is taking them—employers or the general public?

Ms Curran: If we do not have that information to hand for the debate, I am sure that we can provide it to the member. We will ensure that she receives it.

Ms White: I thank the minister. I have spoken to old-age pensioners and groups and they ask about the publication when I mention it, but nobody seems to know exactly where it is distributed.

Will the Executive promote an advertising campaign on television or somewhere else that deals with age discrimination? It is important that the public at large and employers know about the forthcoming legislation. We all know that older people—by which I mean those who are 50 or older rather than necessarily 70 or 80—contribute a great deal to society. They want to get back to work. Alex Neil mentioned pensions. Some people who have private pensions in particular will be forced to go back to work. We want to give them a choice. They should be treated fairly.

I mentioned choice. I commend the SNP's amendment, especially the final words, which are:

"to address the needs of older people in Scotland the Parliament needs the full powers of an independent sovereign state."

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We proceed to winding-up speeches. We are a little bit behind the clock.

11:57

Robert Brown (Glasgow) (LD): This has been a high-quality debate worthy of the Parliament. Its tone is a suitable curtain-raiser for the tone with which we should go into the election.

I join colleagues in thanking for their service senior friends, allies and opponents who are retiring from the Parliament. In many ways, they symbolise the contribution that older people make to our society throughout Scotland. Many members have already been mentioned, but I will single out John Young and my colleague Ian Jenkins. I became a councillor in Glasgow in 1977 when John Young was the council leader. He was the best orator in Glasgow District Council and is a nice man. Through his endeavours, he has contributed to the quality of public life throughout Scotland.

Ian Jenkins made the best speech in the debate—it was erudite and had feeling, compassion and gentleness. The quality that John Young and Ian Jenkins have in common is gentleness. They have other qualities—for example, the mugging of David McLetchie by Ian Jenkins in the earlier days of the Parliament sticks in all our memories—but they behave without bitterness, rancour or nastiness, which is to be commended in the Parliament.

In summarising the debate for the Liberal Democrats, I will make three general points. First, I thank Age Concern Scotland, which, as has been said, gave us the briefing before the debate. I also thank all the other large and small voluntary bodies throughout Scotland that contribute so much to our society. They plug gaps in statutory services and provide lifeline comfort and hope to many people. They give the Parliament the benefit of their practical experience and are often the unsung heroes, possessing all the virtues that we would like our country to have.

Secondly, despite the snipers, the denigration and the bitchy detraction, the Parliament and the Executive have been great reformers. Legislative and administrative achievements over the past four years are impressive and stand comparison with the achievements of any Government of the past. More than 50 acts have been passed, many of which are significant social reforms, such as the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000, the Debt Arrangement and Attachment (Scotland) Act 2002 and the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002. Free central heating provision is the single best achievement of the Parliament and, as Sarah Boyack and other members have said, it is very relevant to the needs of old people in this country.

Many members have mentioned the third issue that I want to mention. Like other people, older people are citizens who benefit from the general health of our society. Quite possibly, they make the most significant contribution to the voluntary sector, which I mentioned earlier. Of course, they have children and grandchildren, some of whom will have benefited from, for example, the student settlement that we achieved in the early days of the Parliament.

I mention as an example the Glasgow Old People's Welfare Association, which runs clubs, residential homes and other facilities throughout the city. The association makes an enormous contribution to the quality of life of many people. It has an unbelievable 2,000 volunteers and is led by a formidable lady called Sheena Glass. It has a total lack of central support or bureaucracy, but her style and personality goes right across the organisation and all the good work that it does.

Another example is a pensioner group in my home area of Rutherglen, although admittedly the group has shrunk in numbers in the past few years. It is led by a lady who I thought was probably dead long since; she is still the chair. She is kept going by the responsibility that she feels for the older people in her group. I might add that almost all of those people are younger than she is—she must be in her late 80s or 90s at least.

I remind the chamber of the last part of the Executive motion, which refers to

"services ... which will support older people in living healthy, active and independent lives."

That is the target of all our efforts. That is the attitude behind the transport concession and free personal care. The transport concession will probably be the most popular action that the Parliament has taken, because it helps people to get out and about without financial concerns. It is talked about on the buses—I hear people talk about it all the time and it is very much welcomed. As Christine Grahame said, that facility must be matched by the availability of services when they are required. Buses that run on an hourly schedule in the evenings—they cannot always be relied on to come and sometimes leave people stranded at cold, dark bus stops—are not a recipe for social inclusion. We must look for new and imaginative ways in which to bridge the service gaps.

I commend to the Parliament the safe stations initiative, which Strathclyde Passenger Transport Executive operates in Paisley. I had the opportunity to visit that project recently. A control centre monitors almost all the local stations within the Strathclyde network and there is an interactive help button at the stations. The initiative is important and I would like it to be extended throughout Scotland. Pharmacies, post offices and pensions have been mentioned. Those are also important issues.

I will finish by mentioning the fact that, a couple of years ago, I attended a 100th birthday party—that is probably symptomatic of my growing age and the people whom I happen to know. The party was held at the Overtoun park bowling club in Rutherglen. Until fairly recently, the gentleman concerned walked a mile each day up and down to Fernhill—not an easy hill to walk up—to play bowls at the club where he still regularly wins medals. As a concession to age, he stopped walking back up the hill about a year ago and now takes the bus.

That is an example of what we all want for older people in our society. We want to see healthy, active and independent older people who lead happy and useful lives. That is what the debate is all about. That is what all of us, throughout the various parties, are in various ways trying to achieve. If we can make some contribution—I believe that the Parliament has—towards reaching those objectives, our existence here over the past four years will have been worth while.

12:03

Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh (Central Scotland) (Con): Members should not let the white hair fool them—I am the baby of the contributors in this debate. It gives me a great deal of satisfaction to be closing for the Tories in the debate—and the boss ain't here.

I give the chamber my apologies for not leaving promptly. Members may wonder why I say that. I should explain that I had apologised to the minister and the Presiding Officer because I expected to have to leave for a radio engagement at lunch time; however, that engagement was cancelled because of the war. On that note, I record my support for our troops abroad and wish them safety and godspeed. I also apologise for my short absence earlier. That was a consequence of a weak bladder—something that is not confined to the old.

I restate briefly where the Conservatives stand in our approach to the debate. We are committed to a health service that is universal in its reach and available to everyone, wherever they live—it must be available free at the point of need, regardless of ability to pay. It must be high quality and apply the highest professional standards and techniques that are based on the latest knowledge. It must put the needs of the patient first as the paramount consideration.

Keith Harding touched on justice issues, which are the cause of one of the greatest insecurities that people in Scotland feel. Those issues affect minorities in our society disproportionately, especially older people. We believe that it is time to reclaim neighbourhoods from the criminals who destroy communities and imprison fearful people in their homes. People should be allowed to walk through their communities free from the fear of crime—God knows, they have earned that.

On social justice, Keith Harding mentioned, as I have done in the past, that the Conservatives introduced the right-to-buy scheme in 1980. No policy that has been introduced since then has done more to lift the vulnerable in Scotland out of poverty.

On transport, concessionary schemes and their extension to cover peak times are all well and good, but they are no flipping use if the level of service and the access to it are not sufficient.

Mr McAveety: Will the member take an intervention?

Mrs McIntosh: Happily.

Mr McAveety: Will she happily tell me who initiated the deregulation of bus services in the 1980s?

Mrs McIntosh: I concede that point and that the Executive has done well in introducing the concessionary travel scheme, but there are areas in which the scheme does not work as well as it might. For example, I am regularly assailed, through correspondence, by a gentleman—a senior citizen, no less—in a suburb of Cumbernauld called Banton, who harangues me to try to get better bus services in his area. In that area, people in their 80s and 90s have to wait for buses that, in their opinion, come on the basis of a calendar, not a timetable.

Cathy Peattie (Falkirk East) (Lab): The member is absolutely right about bus services, but was not it the Tories who deregulated those services, which is what causes such problems for her constituents and mine?

Mrs McIntosh: I do my level best to ensure that the member's constituents and those in the more southern part of Central Scotland get the chance to travel to Falkirk.

Mr Gibson: Will the member take an intervention?

Mrs McIntosh: Of course, but I ask Mr Gibson what is up with his tie.

Mr Gibson: I have never been able to tie it properly; I cannae ride a bike, either. [Laughter.] That is actually true—it is one of my many failings. In fact, I am still working on tying my shoelaces. To return to more prosaic matters, I ask Lyndsay McIntosh whether she and her group will support Kenny MacAskill's member's bill, which aims to reregulate bus services.

Mrs McIntosh: In a word, no. However, I can give the member a suggestion for his shoes—get Velcro fastenings, dear.

I agree whole-heartedly with the comments that have been made about skills for the over-50 work force. I know many old people, some of whom are sitting not too far from me, who have a lot to contribute—they ain't done yet.

As the minister is aware, the central heating programme has not been an unalloyed success and there are little problems here and there. It would not be fair to portray the scheme as blemish free. The minister also mentioned youth courts. The Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill was strengthened by our amendments and I pay tribute to my colleague Bill Aitken for lodging them. The minister also mentioned that there are more police. That is happening slowly, but there is safety in numbers.

Robert Brown: Will the member take an intervention on that point?

Mrs McIntosh: What is this—get me day?

Robert Brown: Given that police numbers in Scotland are at their highest ever, how many more police does the member want? What is her target?

Mrs McIntosh: Police numbers are not at their highest.

Gender equality is dear to the minister's heart. Significant lifestyle changes are now possible, but, in my grandmother's day, regardless of whether someone was working or retired, their life was pretty much the same, as Johann Lamont said. Nowadays, the situation is a bit less difficult, because people can change their lifestyle as they reach the silver-tide era. However, matters are different in our ethnic minority communities and we should pay attention to that.

The speech by Kenny Gibson of the tie was one of the most thoughtful that I have heard in four years and I pay tribute to him. My mother, too, often comments, "I don't want a free television licence; I want my cataracts done." She sat for months and months and had me phoning up to get an appointment. Here is a difficulty that members might want to think about in future: why do we not invest in technology to manage time and appointments? That could help many people. Our older people may be able to take up some of the cancellations.

Kenny Gibson also mentioned respect, career breaks, pensions and transport. Of course, there was Keith Harding's speech as well, much of which I have repeated. There is no doubt about it—means testing demeans the silver tide of voters.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: You have one minute.

Mrs McIntosh: Oh boy. In that case, I pay tribute to previous contributors Trish Godman, Kay Ullrich, Bill Butler, Mary Scanlon and Donald Gorrie. When Ian Jenkins mentioned Tina I was truly nervous. I thought that he had heard about last night and Dr Sylvia Jackson and me. That was worrying. What a lovely speech Colin Campbell made. I will leave it to him to tell members what a CRAFT moment is. John Young should believe me when I say that we will communicate at some stage in the future.

I have one or two comments, for which I crave the Presiding Officer's indulgence.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We are behind time already.

Mrs McIntosh: Indeed we are.

However unwillingly, I shall be making way for an older person. I leave it to others to make the comparisons. However, there is life in this old dog yet. They used to say that life begins at 40. When I got there, they had bloody raised it to 50. At this rate, I will never catch up.

It has been my privilege to serve in this first session of Parliament. I never sought a place in history, but it comes with the territory and is a humbling prospect. I have made many, many friends across the parties. I should tell members that Mike Russell did not send me a Valentine's card and I was disappointed.

Alex Johnstone: Did the member send him one?

Mrs McIntosh: No, I did not. He signalled his intention up to me.

Colleagues across the parties in Central Scotland were strangers who became friends. I am sure that there are many more friends that I have yet to make. No matter what the circumstances of our departures today—to pastures new or out to grass, and whether assured of success or disappointed by the outcome—I send all members every best wish.

12:12

Linda Fabiani (Central Scotland) (SNP): All I can say is that I hope that I am not retiring—I hope that I will still have my job after 1 May.

I thought earlier that I should say something about colleagues across the parties who are retiring; they will all be sadly missed, but they will just have to take my word for it. I hope that my actions have showed how dearly I hold them all, because I feel that if I start to say anything I will just get upset and make a complete and utter fool of myself, so I will not do it.

One thing that Colin Campbell said really struck home; I will paraphrase him. He talked about age being a state of mind, which is absolutely true because, until today, I had not thought of those colleagues as people who were older—I exclude from that Duncan Hamilton. Members have stood up and said that they are retiring, but they are colleagues I have thought of merely as my contemporaries—age has not come into it at any time until today, when they all stood up and stated how ancient they were, and that they were all going off into the sunset.

It struck me that I am getting on a bit as well. Much to my shock, I saw that there was an Executive document called "Are you over 50?", which is a guide to services for older people. I was thinking, "I'm nearly there myself", then Sarah Boyack talked about an institution for women who are over 45.

Sarah Boyack: I am deeply grateful that I have been allowed an intervention. I referred to the Pennell Initiative for Women's Health, which is a group that was set up to promote older women's health. I apologise for my earlier slip of the tongue, which I hope will be corrected in the Official Report.

Linda Fabiani: I thought that Sarah Boyack would appreciate that opportunity, but I still have a wee bit of difficulty with being elderly because I am over 45.

I do not know whether it is the same for other members, but I recently started getting Saga Magazine sent to me every month here in Parliament. Only when I heard Helen Eadie clarifying what Saga is did I think that I should perhaps have thrown the magazine in the bin. However, I thank Colin Campbell for kindly gifting me his Saga pen to remember him by.

To return to the reality of the debate—older people's place in Scotland—the minister rightly cited the developments that Parliament has implemented on behalf of older people. The minister also said that nobody should have to live on less than the state pension and the minimum income guarantee. However, Sandra White rightly said that the existence of the minimum income guarantee is proof that the pension is not enough to live on. Furthermore, there is a big problem with people not applying for the minimum income guarantee and not taking up their full benefits.

Another member—I cannot remember whom—referred to the fact that there are local initiatives that involve giving people welfare benefits advice. For example, I think that the Eaga Partnership does that when its staff visit people for the central heating programme. We should consider giving such advice nationally. We should be able to tie all the different initiatives into the fundamental question of whether people have enough money to live on; it should not be difficult to include that in every initiative for older people.

The minister made it sound as if the land of milk and honey had arrived during the past four years, but I am sure that she would be the first to admit—Bill Butler referred to this—that we still have a long way to go. I agree that changes have been made, but it is a sad indictment of our society that we still have a long way to go.

Free personal care was referred to. I am extremely proud of the fact that it was the Parliament rather than the Executive that forced the issue on free personal care. Everyone in the Parliament has something to be proud of in that respect. However, there are problems with free personal care, which Mary Scanlon highlighted. She was right that we have all had constituency problems involving free personal care not working in the way that everyone thought that it would and, indeed, in the way that Parliament intended it to work.

Transport and travel were also referred to. Kenny Gibson and I were curious about why Lewis Macdonald rather than Des McNulty will close the debate for the minister, but we were not long into the debate when we realised why. Members started to let slip the fact there was to be a big announcement on national concessionary travel—I think that Dr Sylvia Jackson eventually blew the gaff and stole Lewis Macdonald's thunder. Again, I think that the provision of national concessionary travel is a triumph for a viable Opposition and the Parliament because the Executive has been forced to admit that the localised concessionary travel policy has not worked and that concessionary travel must be rolled out nationally. I look forward to hearing the proposal's being formally announced.

Keith Harding said something important when he said that what elderly people require is to be treated with dignity rather than to be patronised. I tried to imagine anyone trying to patronise my colleagues Kay Ullrich and Winnie Ewing; if someone did try that, I think that they would be quickly told something. Keith Harding also showed a bit of a nerve in saying much of what he said about what the Tories did in their years in Government, but there was also much truth in what he said; for example, about stealth taxes on pensioners and the raid on pension schemes. Those were valid points on matters that are storing up big problems for the future.

Mr Harding also went on about the how the right to buy was the most wonderful thing that had ever happened to alleviate poverty, but he will not be surprised to hear that I do not agree. On the minister's intervention on the right to buy, I do not like the suggestion that someone who happened to buy their council house was too stupid to realise that doing so would have implications.

Johann Lamont: Does Linda Fabiani agree that one of the big issues around the right to buy was that it made logical sense for people to buy their council house because rents were so high because they were not appropriately supported? Does she agree that people who bought their council houses did not think about how they would maintain and repair their houses after they had bought them? The problem was not that people were stupid, but that council housing and the right to buy operated against ordinary working class people. Linda Fabiani accepted that point in committee.

Linda Fabiani: I thank the member—I get the point.

That problem also exists in the private sector. If we consider all tenements, it is not only ex-council houses that have problems with repairs and maintenance. When I was a housing professional, I often came across a problem for elderly people in relation to the right to buy, which was that the families of elderly people would buy their parents' council house on their behalf, but the family situation would change. I have had in my office many times elderly people who were homeless because their families had disenfranchised them. The right to buy did not really protect the elderly.

I am running out of time, but I cannot leave the debate without saying firmly that the only thing that can really make a difference for the elderly of our country is to give us the powers that would truly make a difference. A viable independent sovereign state could make its own decisions about how we treat the elderly. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development estimates that the 21 most developed countries give 7.4 per cent of their GDP to their state pensions—this country gives only 4.3 per cent, so we have nothing to be proud of. Roll on independence and the opportunity to change that and many other things.

12:21

The Deputy Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning (Lewis Macdonald): As we have heard today, people's priorities and interests might change as they grow older, but that does not mean that they stop being active, interested and involved. Today's debate has provided clear examples of that.

Older people are the backbone of families and communities. They give of their experience, knowledge and time as carers, volunteers, community activists, parents and grandparents. The term social capital is very relevant to what older people have to offer. Those who write off people once they reach a certain age are making a serious and significant mistake and the Scottish Executive has acknowledged the huge contribution that Scotland's older people want to make and the resource that they represent. Older people want to be valued and they want access to opportunities, jobs and services.

The Scottish Parliament has rightly worked to ensure that older people have the health and care services that they need. I welcome the tribute that Alex Neil paid to Henry McLeish for his part in introducing free personal care for the elderly. However, sometimes the concentration on such matters can lead to the assumption that they are all that elderly people are interested in and that the entire age group is in need of care. That is patently not true and the key to a policy for successful aging in the decades to come is that we recognise the extent of the role of older people in our communities and society.

People of all ages have talent and ability to offer. For example, older people have an excellent record in business start-ups and often outdo their younger competitors. As has been mentioned in the debate, many employers in Scotland have come to recognise the benefits of having a diverse work force and the gains that can be made through the experience and maturity that is represented by older workers.

In the past four years, employment levels for older workers have risen faster than they have for the work force as a whole. From 2006, age discrimination in the workplace will be unlawful, which will build on the current code of practice on age diversity in employment. The age positive campaign aims to raise awareness among employers through a series of events that are planned throughout Scotland in May and June, and with an updated code of practice on age diversity, which Iain Gray has launched. The change in attitude that is required is a key challenge and the legal change that will ensure that the rights of older people have the same protection as the rights of other sections of society is important in that regard.

Being able to get out and about is key to making the most of everything that is available to people in their communities. As has been said by a number of members, public transport plays an important part in many older people's lives. In rural areas, especially, public transport can be a lifeline and that is why we are investing significant funds in our rural transport initiatives. I am sorry to have to disappoint Linda Fabiani, but I will not be making any new announcement today in that regard. However, it is well known—other than on the SNP benches—that Iain Gray announced some weeks ago that any future Administration in which Labour is involved will create a national concessionary fares scheme.

The rural transport fund and the rural community initiative offer real benefits to older people who are unable to access the bus services to which concessionary fare schemes apply. For example, I recently visited Peebles in Ian Jenkins' constituency to launch the new community minibus that the Tweeddale Association of Voluntary Organisations is operating as part of that rural community transport initiative. The new minibus will enable many older people who would otherwise find it difficult to get out to access services and to visit friends and family.

Alex Neil: One issue that has been raised by many of the minister's colleagues is the Tory deregulation of buses. Will there be a commitment in Labour's manifesto to the re-regulation of buses?

Lewis Macdonald: I am delighted that Alex Neil has given me the opportunity to respond on that matter, because yesterday morning I shared a platform with Kenny MacAskill at an election hustings on transport matters. Kenny made it quite clear that the SNP's commitment to re-regulation is one that will give local authorities the power to regulate buses if they so wish.

I must tell Alex Neil, as I told Kenny MacAskill yesterday, that that is precisely what the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001 already created through the measures that allow quality contracts to be introduced. I am sure that the SNP will catch up with us in due course, and that it will become aware not only of what we intend to do, but what we have already done.

On September 30 last year, we introduced free off-peak bus travel for all elderly and disabled people in Scotland. One million retired people throughout Scotland have experienced the benefits of that scheme, which makes a key contribution to providing access for older people to services such as health care, education, welfare and jobs. It also contributes to the greater involvement of elderly people in the general life of the community.

We are committed to further enhancement of concessionary travel. This morning, I met the chairman of the Scottish Pensioners Association to draw attention to the equalisation of age eligibility for concessionary travel. From Tuesday 1 April, 125,000 men aged between 60 and 64 will be able to benefit from the same free concessionary travel that is currently available to men of pensionable age.

Dorothy-Grace Elder: No one doubts the minister's sincerity, but I would like an answer to my earlier question. What is the Executive's position on employing people who are over 60? Does it include a complete cut-off at age 60? Some literature seems to indicate that it has, while other literature says that the Executive is not age discriminatory in the least.

Lewis Macdonald: I will come back to the point that Dorothy-Grace Elder raises. It is certainly a matter that I shall seek to address, but there are one or two other points that I want to respond to first.

The introduction of age equalisation is only one more step. As I said, we have already made it clear that those on the Executive benches intend, in the next Parliament, to create a single national free concessionary travel scheme for pensioners and people over 60 throughout Scotland. To make that possible, we have made available significant funds, which have already amounted to nearly £100 million a year.

Beyond that, we are also committed to working with the UK Government to improve access to transport for disabled people, including disabled elderly people, in Scotland. Last May, we established the mobility and access committee for Scotland to allow disabled people to feed in their views on transport issues and to suggest early practical improvements that could be made. Robert Brown mentioned the safe stations initiative in the Strathclyde area, and many other such initiatives are already under way. The mobility and access committee for Scotland will assist us in spreading that best practice.

Learning and lifelong learning are also areas of great interest to older people. In February, Iain Gray launched our strategy for lifelong learning to highlight those matters. Gaining new skills and new knowledge is a lifetime opportunity; it is not an opportunity only for young adults, as was once the view. That is why our strategy emphasises the lifelong approach—we want everyone to be able to access learning that is most relevant to their needs.

The internet is just one of the latest tools that people can use to gain new knowledge and access to the internet is clearly something that can be highly beneficial for older people. I was interested in Helen Eadie's comment about the 101-year-old who was learning those skills. We are committed to ensuring that by 2005 everyone will have access to the web through public internet access points within a mile of their homes in urban areas and within five miles of their homes in rural areas. That will create an additional 1,000 new internet access points, and 450 venues are already in place. We are working with Age Concern Scotland to identify and target venues that could be of particular benefit to older people.

As I said earlier, health care is not the only thing that matters to older people, although it does of course matter: many of us will need to be looked after at some time in the future, so we must ensure that when that time comes the necessary services are available to make that possible. That is why the Executive introduced free personal and nursing care, a decision that was welcomed by Help the Aged and many other organisations. There are issues to be resolved in the implementation of free personal care, which is why we are assessing its progress rigorously and have committed £250 million over two years to achieving it. Through the monitoring group, we and our partners will ensure that those implementation issues are addressed effectively.

In the health service, delayed discharge is an issue that is of particular interest to older people. Last year's data clearly show that we are succeeding in reducing the figures for delayed discharge. I look forward to the latest figures being announced later this week, and to finding out whether we have continued to make an impact on them, as I suspect we have.

The matter of access to information has been raised by a number of members, including Paul Martin, Ian Jenkins and Sandra White. We are committed to ensuring that older people have access to information. The "Are you over 50?" booklet has been widely distributed through job centres, libraries, general practitioner surgeries, citizens advice bureaux and older people's organisations. It is a product of the Department for Work and Pensions and is aimed at ensuring that people have access to the information that they need.

The one-stop shop idea that has been mentioned is very positive, and it is something that can be built upon. Access to good and accurate information is vital and through the Executive's publications, its website and the work that we are continuing to do with elderly forums, we are addressing the best ways in which to make information available to people when and where they need it.

I am pleased to confirm Frank McAveety's success this week in resolving the problem of fees in the care home sector. We have delivered an additional £130 million of public funding to that sector since July 2001 and I am glad that the threat of blocking the access of elderly people to care homes has been withdrawn, and that care home operators will work in partnership with local authorities.

Community pharmacies have been mentioned. For those who missed it, Frank McAveety's recent announcement was that we will not accept the recommendations of the Office of Fair Trading; in Scotland, we will retain community pharmacies and will give them the protection that they need, because we acknowledge their importance in providing services to older people.

Dorothy-Grace Elder asked about the Scottish Executive's position as an employer. Sixty is the standard retirement age for the work force, but that position is under review and we expect a report on the subject to come out in the course of the next couple of months.

Johann Lamont: As somebody who comes from a profession in which people cannot wait to get a package and to get out early, I find the notion of people wanting to work beyond their retirement age a bit strange. Does the minister agree that some of the issues around employment beyond the age of 60 relate to the fact that people have poor pensions and do not necessarily have the resources to do the many interesting things that people wish to do in old age? That is why work might offer a better alternative for them. Although we should argue against age discrimination, we should also talk about people having the right not to work after 60.

Lewis Macdonald: I support the view that people should have the right to choose. If people choose to continue working for Scottish ministers longer than they must, then who are we to stand in their way? The ability of older people to choose whether to work will be important for all of us.

Scots of all ages want opportunities to be active and to participate. We in the Executive are determined to remove the barriers that prevent that, particularly in transport, lifelong learning, enterprise, housing, health and care. At the beginning of the Parliament, we said that things would get better for older people: they have, and there is a range of ways in which things have got very much got better, including free concessionary travel, free personal care and free central heating. They will continue to get better, but more must be done. That is why we need to work together with our partners in the voluntary and private sectors and throughout central Government and local government to ensure that we deliver services for older people. We want to make Scotland an even better place to live for people of all ages—that includes those who retire from the Parliament today.

Great Northern Partnership

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): Our final item of business this morning is the members' business debate on motion S1M-4020, in the name of Elaine Thomson, on the Great Northern Partnership and social inclusion partnerships.

Motion debated,

That the Parliament commends the work done by the Great Northern Partnership (GNP) in Aberdeen; notes that the GNP plays an important role in improving quality of life and extending opportunities for those living there, especially the community of Middlefield, and further commends social inclusion partnerships across Scotland for empowering local communities.

12:35

Elaine Thomson (Aberdeen North) (Lab): I am pleased to introduce the debate today, which is almost our last debate.

The Great Northern Partnership is one of 48 social inclusion partnerships that were formed to address social exclusion in Scotland. Social inclusion partnerships come in all shapes and sizes; some are based on geographical areas and some are thematic. The GNP is a geographic SIP and is unusual because it is in an archipelago that is made up of four islands that are all in the northern part of Aberdeen. The four areas comprise: Middlefield; Printfield; Alexander and Hayton; and Ferrier and Sandilands. However, all share the same problems of social exclusion and a combination of high unemployment, poor skills, low incomes, poor housing, high crime, poor health and high rates of family breakdown. That combination of disadvantage not only causes deprivation but has an impact on the ability of communities to exercise their full citizenship rights and to participate fully in wider society.

Aberdeen is a city with almost the lowest unemployment rate in Scotland, and it has higher than average incomes. Compared to many areas of Scotland it also has better health. Therefore the situation of those communities that do not share that prosperity is made all the more difficult. In Middlefield, which is the largest of the areas and which is in my constituency, the health statistics are sharply different from those for the rest of the city. Those statistics put that area in the worst 10 per cent in Scotland.

Characteristics of the GNP areas are a high number of children and young people and a higher-than-average number of single parents. Some 53 per cent of children in Middlefield are living in households with benefit-dependent parents—that is double the percentage of families with children living on income support in the rest of Aberdeen.

However, over the past four years the GNP has begun to address many of those issues. It has very high levels of community involvement in each of the four areas that make up the partnership. The aims of the GNP are to work to improve the social, economic and physical environment of those areas and to bring together effectively all the different agencies and organisations that can help to change them. Crucial to everything is ensuring that those who live in the GNP areas are involved—that communities are consulted and listened to—so that people in those communities are empowered through participation and training to take on leadership roles. It is important to ensure that they play a central part in identifying priorities and developing strategies for the many different types of work that the GNP undertakes. The aim is to restore and promote people's sense of citizenship and pride in where they live.

A high proportion of community representatives are involved at all levels of the GNP. Sixteen out of 28 board members—55 per cent of the total membership—are community representatives, four from each area. All but one of the sub-groups of the GNP are chaired by community representatives. I acknowledge the immense amount of work that people from those communities have contributed to the GNP, and I acknowledge the work of others, including local councillors such as Councillor Gordon Graham, the current vice-chair of the GNP, who stood in as chair before the new chair, Dawn Galashin, was appointed.

When I asked what difference the GNP makes, Dawn said that it

"Makes it better for local folk to make decisions and the ability to challenge agencies providing services within the area. We also have the ability to make funding decisions at a local level".

There are many different areas in which the GNP and all the other agencies involved are beginning to make a difference—for example, in tackling drug misuse. The level of drug misuse is high throughout Aberdeen, but it is higher than average in the GNP areas. The GNP set up a people's jury to consider how the quality of life for individuals and families in communities that are affected by drugs can be improved, which led to a specific GNP drugs plan. The GNP is now a member of the Aberdeen drug action team, ensuring that projects and strategies reflect accurately the particular issues that GNP communities face. There are projects such as "Give Kids a Chance", a community referral scheme that aims to divert young people away from drug and alcohol misuse.

The GNP is also working with other organisations, such as Aberdeen Drugs Action, to provide an outreach service. This weekend, a group will travel to Preston to see an innovative needle-exchange programme.

The activities of the GNP reach out into many different areas, such as health and providing support for parents and young children. Middlefield is well known for possessing a "healthy hoose", which is staffed by nurse practitioners who provide advice and help on a range of issues, from healthy eating to encouraging breast feeding and providing better local access to general practitioners. That is complemented by other projects such as Healthy Roots, which aims to turn disused allotment land into community gardens. The project has recently got its lease and it will move on to a new phase.

Early intervention is seen as vital; the GNP works to reduce teenage pregnancies and cases of low-birth-weight babies. The "baby, think it over" project uses realistic baby models with microchips to bring home the reality of the responsibilities of early parenthood. Addressing the needs of children with special needs is also important, as is working to close the opportunity gap that exists for so many children.

The important new community schools work with many of the GNP projects. Some exist at primary level and others, at primary and secondary level, will be rebuilt or refurbished over the next few years.

The disparity in opportunity between areas cannot be overemphasised. The rate of pupils moving on to higher and further education varies from just over 10 per cent in some areas to over 90 per cent in others. That makes the presence of the University of Aberdeen and of communities and children working to encourage higher rates of participation all the more important. Also in Middlefield is the learning house, run by Scottish Enterprise, which is complemented by learning projects elsewhere. It provides access to learning for families, and is building the confidence of people who have often had negative experiences of school.

I could mention many other aspects of the work of the GNP. However, the role of the great northern partnership and other SIPs is vital in promoting social inclusion. I am delighted that it will share in the £60 million that the Scottish Executive has committed to social inclusion partnerships this year. That will involve communities, ensure that all the different agencies in the public and voluntary sector work together in a holistic and cohesive way, improve life and widen opportunity in Scotland's less advantaged communities. I commend the contribution that the GNP has made and continues to make.

12:42

Brian Adam (North-East Scotland) (SNP): I lodged an amendment to the motion and I am delighted that, in her speech, Elaine Thomson referred to the role of the community representatives within the GNP.

I am also delighted that she talked about the healthy roots project. As the former councillor for Middlefield, I had considerable involvement in setting up the project, during Middlefield's previous existence as a priority partnership area. I was the author of the scheme to turn a disused allotment area into what I hope will become a successful community business. Sometimes such projects take time to gestate and it has taken almost eight years for the project to get to the point that it has reached. Nevertheless, it is a welcome development.

I commend the work that the community representatives of the GNP have done. They undertake a huge amount of work for the areas that they represent. I know most of the people in Middlefield, having worked with them for quite some time. I pay tribute to Paula Mann, Paul Calder, Helen Holland and Ernest Chapman, who are the community representatives, and to Councillor Kevin Stewart—they all champion the Middlefield area. Their counterparts in Fersands, Printfield and Alexander/Hayton in Tillydrone also do sterling work for their communities.

However, their work is handicapped by the policies of the Executive. Some members might be disappointed by my saying that, particularly as this is to be the last debate in this parliamentary session. However, my experience of the SIPs and their predecessor organisations is that they are used as cash cows by councils and other agencies. Before the GNP starts work each year, it has to pay 2.5 per cent of its grant—a little more than £20,000—to Aberdeen City Council in support charges. Furthermore, this year it will have to spend in excess of £200,000 out of a total grant of less than £900,000 to pay for its support team. The moneys for the support team and the council payments, which swallow up almost a quarter of the grant, are not being used to deliver any services to the communities, and the worst is yet to come.

Earlier, I talked about the GNP being used as a cash cow. I would be happy if the money were being used to enhance services in Middlefield, Printfield, Fersands and Alexander/Hayton, but it is often the case that the GNP subsidises city-wide services, which should be funded from the mainstream budgets of the council or other agencies. I am happy to give some examples of that.

The safe and sound project aims to improve the quality of life of disadvantaged children. The project is provided with £20,000 from the council, sure start Scotland and Grampian Primary Care NHS Trust, and £6,000 from the GNP. Representatives of the GNP assure me that, although it provides 23 per cent of the money, the GNP areas do not get 23 per cent of the services. Other areas that do not pay for those services get the bulk of the support from that money.

The children's services training and assessment centre receives about £140,000 from various sources and almost £28,000 from the GNP. As part of the Scotland-wide work of the Aberlour Child Care Trust, its aims are to provide opportunities for training and qualifications in working with children and families. Although that is admirable work, the funding for other areas of the city comes from mainstream funding, whereas the funding for the GNP work comes from the GNP's budget. Why is that?

The GNP is set to give £5,000 to the business support group, for which other funding will come from mainstream sources. The GNP is set to hand over £30,000 for early intervention schemes in education. In reality, that money should come from mainstream funding. I could give a whole series of examples.

SIPs are supposed to enhance services in socially excluded communities. Elaine Thomson highlighted exactly why the GNP is needed in Middlefield in her constituency. However, the money is being used to support services across the board within the city. Many of the activities that the GNP's resources are being used to supplement should receive mainstream funding.

The Presiding Officer: Please move to a close.

Brian Adam: I am just about to do so, Presiding Officer.

Rather than duplicate the administrative functions of other public and voluntary sector agencies, we could better empower communities such as Middlefield, Alexander/Hayton, Fersands and Printfield, and their representatives, by direct funding of local voluntary organisations.

12:48

Mr Tom McCabe (Hamilton South) (Lab): I welcome the motion and I congratulate Elaine Thomson on securing a debate on SIPs as the first session of our Scottish Parliament draws to a close. It is difficult to imagine a more important topic for discussion as we close the first, historic, four-year session.

Communities throughout Scotland have been inspired by the opportunities that SIPs have afforded them to influence and develop services. They have been amazed that, when given the opportunity, ordinary people can make real and substantial changes within their communities.

Solid examples of the work that has been done by the north Hamilton and Blantyre social inclusion partnership are emerging. I recently attended the opening of an information technology centre in Burnbank and a changing places community conference that highlighted the various initiatives under taken by the SIP. When one witnesses at first hand the enthusiasm and the genuine achievements of that local partnership, it is impossible to doubt the contribution that it has made to my local community.

In recent weeks, the Scottish National Party has delivered a slap in the face to all those people who have worked so hard to establish the priorities of their communities and to make addressing them a reality. Only a fundamental misunderstanding of the nature of the willingness and enthusiasm that exists in deprived areas can lead to the production of the kind of policy nonsense that the SNP has produced in the past few weeks.

Alex Neil has spoken about social inclusion partnerships being stuffed with people in suits. The reality is that the partnerships are full of enthusiastic local people who know the shortcomings of their communities but are determined to grab the opportunities available to deal with those shortcomings.

We should be clear about what divides responsible politicians from the nationalists. We believe in social inclusion; they believe in slogans. We believe in independent communities; they believe only in independence. Social inclusion partnerships have empowered some of the most deprived communities across Scotland. People are grateful for that opportunity. I hope that that opportunity continues to be afforded to them over the next session of the Scottish Parliament.

12:50

Richard Lochhead (North-East Scotland) (SNP): What a joy it is to follow Tom McCabe's positive contribution. However, it is a pleasure to speak in today's debate. The first members' business debate in the Parliament was on the fish processing industry, which is an Aberdeen issue, and the last members' business debate is also on an Aberdeen issue. It is a pity that no Tories, Liberals or members of parties other than Labour and the SNP have turned up for the debate.

One reason why many of us are in the SNP is because we know that Scotland is a rich country, yet it has so much deprivation. That is the case in Aberdeen. It is a cruel irony that Europe's oil and gas capital has substantial pockets of deprivation. Clearly, it is a ridiculous situation that Aberdeen should have pockets of deprivation that are surrounded by such wealth.

One of the difficulties is that Aberdeen's wealth masks the deprivation that organisations such as the GNP try to tackle with the help of the many people who assist them. It is probably harder to be on a low income in Aberdeen than just about anywhere else in Scotland because people have to live alongside some of the wealthiest areas in the whole of Scotland. The price of property in Aberdeen is way beyond the means of many people in the GNP areas.

We need to reduce the obstacles that prevent organisations such as the GNP from getting more public funding and Government assistance. One such obstacle is the way in which the Scottish Executive's public funding formulas do not recognise Aberdeen's deprivation, which is masked by the average wealth statistics for the area. There must be a further disaggregation of the statistics that the Scottish Executive uses in allocating public funding so that such areas of deprivation are identified. Aberdeen currently loses out on a lot of public funding because of the formulas that are used.

I was given some examples of that when I met representatives of the GNP a few months ago. The GNP cannot apply for the Executive's better neighbourhood funding because Aberdeen's level of deprivation is not recognised. The GNP was able to apply for only a tiny amount of the cash that sportscotland made available for sport and social inclusion because the formulas do not recognise Aberdeen's deprivation. The deprivation is hidden by the area's relative wealth, which comes from the oil and gas industry. I was also told about the pots of cash from Communities Scotland, for which the GNP cannot apply because Aberdeen does not qualify.

I mention those Government funding formulas, but I am not pleading a special case. There are genuine concerns about the impact of those formulas on our ability to tackle deprivation in north-east Scotland and Aberdeen. A few months ago, Margaret Curran announced that a slice of lottery funding would be put aside for deprived areas because many areas of Scotland were losing out on their fair share. Lo and behold, there was not one penny for north-east Scotland and Aberdeen. Once again, the formulas that were used did not recognise the deprivation that exists in Aberdeen.

As Elaine Thomson mentioned in her speech and as Brian Adam has explained, Aberdeen has a desperate need for that cash. Organisations such as the GNP must be allowed to apply for it.

Mr McCabe: The member seems to be making an argument for refining social inclusion partnership funding, yet the SNP's policy is to abolish such partnerships. Which is the SNP's policy?

Richard Lochhead: Brian Adam has outlined the SNP's position. My point is that organisations such as the GNP cannot even get access to the funding that is currently available for tackling deprivation. The successors to social inclusion partnerships will have the same problem unless we change the fundamental issues that prevent deprivation in Aberdeen from being tackled.

Elaine Thomson also mentioned the drugs problem in the GNP areas. There is a massive drugs problem in Aberdeen, yet we get the second lowest level of funding in the whole of Scotland because of the perceived wealth of the area. Today's press tells of people who have committed crimes so that they can go to jail and get treatment for drug abuse because they cannot get it by any other means. It all comes back to the same issue of the funding formulas denying cash to the projects that are trying to tackle deprivation and deal with massive social problems in areas of Aberdeen.

It is important that we have some clear measurement of the success or otherwise of the initiatives that are trying to tackle deprivation in Scotland. Where exactly are we after four years of the new Parliament? Do we know if we have moved forward or if Aberdeen is relatively better or worse off under the Executive's policies? I argue that we have not moved forward under the first four years of the Scottish Parliament.

I also argue that we have to get real powers so that the Parliament can make a real difference in tackling deprivation in Aberdeen and elsewhere and that we need a change of Government because we have had four years of wasted opportunities to tackle deprivation. Scotland has not moved forward. We know that the overall statistics show that poverty is increasing. We have to have a change in the Government and we need more powers for the Parliament so that we can change Aberdeen and elsewhere for the better.

12:56

Sarah Boyack (Edinburgh Central) (Lab): I am happy to congratulate Elaine Thomson on securing the debate. I think that I replied to the first members' business debate in the Parliament so it is probably appropriate that, as a back bencher, I speak in the final members' business debate of the session.

Elaine Thomson's motion should be supported. It makes two key points. It recognises the good work that has been done in Aberdeen by the GNP and it acknowledges the importance of SIPs throughout Scotland. Tom McCabe made the important point that SIPs are doing good work. Without SIPs, who would be focusing on and pulling together some of our most disadvantaged communities in Scotland? SIPs are a vital way of helping local communities advocate for themselves the kind of changes and support that they want from local facilities.

I recognise the concept of a strong and economically powerful city with pockets of severe deprivation and social exclusion. The purpose of SIPs is to try to give those communities a voice so that they are not isolated and left apart in a sea of affluence.

Brian Adam: Will the member take an intervention?

Sarah Boyack: I will when I get into my discussion.

Many communities in my constituency in Edinburgh, which is one of the most prosperous cities in the United Kingdom, experience such social exclusion.

SIPs give local people the chance to shape their communities themselves and to engage with local institutions of the state, whether council departments, the police or health organisations. Abolishing SIPs would take away that power of advocacy and the opportunity for social empowerment.

Brian Adam: We probably agree on the analysis of the source of the problem but we disagree about the solution. Will Sarah Boyack comment on the proportion of the funding made available through SIPs that is used up in duplicating administration? Is that the best way of empowering communities? Does she not agree that the best way is to encourage existing local organisations rather than to set up new ones?

Sarah Boyack: I think Brian Adam misunderstands the purpose of SIPs and the way in which they operate. I have yet to be lobbied on that issue, although voluntary organisations and charitable groups are speedy in beating a path to my door when they think they do not have enough money. The key issue is that SIPs add to local communities and give them a voice.

Elaine Thomson has talked about an area-based SIP, but I want to highlight the work of the Edinburgh youth social inclusion partnership, which is a thematic partnership. It cuts across some of our most disadvantaged communities and ensures that the voices of young people are heard by those who make policy and decide on local services. As a local MSP, I am keen to support the work of that SIP.

Part of that work is ensuring that there is a dialogue between young people and the people who provide facilities. I have recently been at discussions on leisure facilities and transport. It can be quite challenging to be approached, as I have been, by young people who have a list of ideas about areas in which they want local services to improve. It is our job as politicians to see how we can improve the facilities that those young people depend on. Although that can be challenging, it is part of the overall approach to delivery of social justice throughout Scotland.

SIPs do not duplicate local services—they change them. They challenge local service providers and act as an advocate for local people and, particularly in my patch, for young people who would otherwise be totally excluded.

It is easy to label young people as troublemakers who create problems. However, we need to do a real job of work by examining the problems that they experience. They are vulnerable; in my area, they are often not allowed to use local sports facilities or cafes—indeed, they cannot afford to use them—because a very small number create problems. As a result, they are all labelled as troublemakers or as people who create hassle. That is not the case, and it is important that our local youth SIP challenges such views. Although young people are seen as threatening, they are the biggest group of victims of crime. Their voices must be heard by policy-makers, but that would not happen if it were not for the local youth SIP, which pulls together or changes the work that the police, social work and local communities carry out.

That is not duplication; instead it is an essential part of the armoury with which we can tackle social exclusion, give the most vulnerable and socially excluded people in our society a proper voice and ensure that local services do not ignore their needs. That is why I support Elaine Thomson's motion and the work of the youth SIP in my constituency. I want to see more rather than less of that kind of work. The SNP is making a big mistake with its commitment to abolish SIPs.

13:01

The Deputy Minister for Social Justice (Des McNulty): One of the number of points that Brian Adam got wrong in his speech was his claim that this is the last debate. I understand that there will be a further debate later this afternoon.

The Presiding Officer: Modesty prevents me from commenting on that.

Des McNulty: I begin by pointing out that this is the final members' business debate. I know that the Presiding Officer and Tom McCabe were very much involved in setting up the system of members' business debates right at the start of the Parliament. The debates have been a very considerable success. They have promoted a series of worthy causes; indeed, speaking for myself, I am very pleased by our progress in getting speedy justice for asbestos sufferers. Duncan McNeil and I have promoted their cause in various members' business debates.

Members have raised issues on behalf of interests in their communities or on behalf of people who had cases that needed to be highlighted. In many cases, the debates have drawn further responses from the Executive. As a result, they have proved to be an important vehicle for getting issues discussed and action brought forward. They are an adornment to this Parliament that we can be proud of.

I congratulate Elaine Thomson on securing this debate and on highlighting both the work of the GNP and the SIP programme itself. Evaluations clearly show that the GNP has progressed well, is operating strategically and has an excellent record of community involvement. Indeed, for the reasons that Elaine Thomson pointed out, it can claim to be community-led in many ways.

I shall address some of Richard Lochhead's points later, but when we consider how we can assist deprived communities, we should take a genuinely consultative approach to the matter. The Scottish Executive or local government should look for bottom-up solutions that suit a local community's particular circumstances, rather than adopt top-down policies for a city such as Aberdeen. People in a local area experience its problems at first hand, but are also in a good position to assess the area's relative advantages or any different opportunities that it might present. The great virtue of the SIP system is that it allows local people to influence what goes on and how resources are spent in their community to suit their best interests.

Brian Adam: I readily acknowledge that that is the intention. In as much as success has been achieved, the SIP programme has been a success. However, will the minister deal with the amount of SIPs' money that is spent not on services or duplicating services, but on duplicating administration? I made a point about that. What is the capacity of councils and other bodies to use that money beyond the areas covered by a SIP?

Des McNulty: I will deal later with that issue, which is important in considering the transition that lies ahead as SIPs move towards community planning.

It is important to highlight some of the GNP's successes. In identifying the strategic priorities of health, early years, youth, education and community learning, and employment and enterprise, not only did the partnership identify the key priorities but it adopted a strategic approach to improving services in the local community with the aim of achieving significant change.

Elaine Thomson and Brian Adam mentioned several projects that have achieved such change. The youth advice and information project provides young people with advice, information and a referral service. The young film-makers initiative, which involved 156 participants during 2001-02, has engaged with young people. Projects such as the Fersands and Fountain mini family centre and the St Machar parents support project bring communities and agencies together to address early-years initiatives in the context of social inclusion. The healthy roots initiative involves local groups and voluntary and public sector agencies working together to transform a large unused site in the middle of Middlefield. It brings together worthwhile activities, such as growing healthy food, improving the environment for wildlife and promoting recycling.

SIPs must be about more than individual projects. The projects must work together toward the aim of improving the quality of life in their areas. A strong argument can be made that SIPs must not become islands in a city such as Aberdeen. Links with the way in which the city is governed must be closer. Linking SIPs into the community planning partnerships in the city and saying that the city's government and all the agencies that are involved in governing and delivering services in the city must take on board how SIPs operate are positive steps.

Brian Adam: Will the minister give way?

Des McNulty: I will finish my point.

The Presiding Officer: Technically, the minister is in his last minute.

Des McNulty: We are progressing links so that the experience and skills that have been gained through the way in which the SIP has worked can be shared. We want to develop better engagement between the SIP, Aberdeen City Council, Grampian NHS Board and other agencies that provide services.

Richard Lochhead has repeatedly focused on funding formulas not only in relation to SIPs, but in relation to a variety of issues. Honesty is required. Funding formulas deliver outcomes. Does Richard Lochhead argue that money should be taken from one area and delivered to another area? If so, he should say where that money should be taken from and give the criteria for delivering it to another area.

In Aberdeen, we have done the opposite of what Richard Lochhead says we have done. We have identified areas of disadvantage and put in resources. Through the GNP, we have sought to deliver significant improvements in those more deprived communities. We are achieving that and significant progress has been made.

SIPs perform a valuable role throughout Scotland. Last Saturday morning, I attended a SIP event in my area that brought people together to consider the range of activities that voluntary agencies have provided in Clydebank. I know of many people who have SIPS in their area and who have had similar experiences.

SIPS are a way of bringing people together and of identifying what can be taken forward and what can be delivered. There are abundant examples of the good work that SIPS have done not only in Aberdeen but elsewhere in Scotland. SIPS are worth protecting and developing. We are moving forward to a point at which SIPS become a critical element in community planning and what we have learned up to now in the SIPs can be progressed in that context.

The Presiding Officer: I close the last members' business debate of this Parliament.

13:10

Meeting suspended until 14:30.

14:30

On resuming—

Question Time

SCOTTISH EXECUTIVE

Agriculture

1. Tavish Scott (Shetland) (LD): To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of the agricultural industry and what issues were discussed. (S1O-6711)

The Minister for Environment and Rural Development (Ross Finnie): I met representatives of the agricultural industry on 17 March. The main topics for discussion at recent meetings have been implementation of the agriculture strategy and the European Commission's proposals for reform of the common agricultural policy.

Tavish Scott: Does the minister accept that environmentally sensitive area status is extremely important for those parts of Scotland that have such designations? Does he accept that the consultation being undertaken by his department gives an opportunity to review not only the three options outlined in the consultation paper but a fourth option, namely the rolling-on of ESAs to ensure that, in a smooth transition, land management contracts can be introduced while the benefits of the ESAs are not lost to those farmers and crofters who have them?

Ross Finnie: I certainly accept that the consultation includes three options. Clearly, the purpose of the consultation process is to get considered and detailed responses, particularly from those areas currently under ESA designation, and to allow members to put their point as to what might be a better and preferable course of action. It is perfectly legitimate for the people of Shetland to take that course.

Mr Adam Ingram (South of Scotland) (SNP): Did the minister's discussions cover the proposals of the Scottish Agricultural College to centralise its educational facilities in Edinburgh? Would he care to reflect on the folly of closing the most popular campus, at Auchincruive, with its most appropriate rural setting, in favour of an expensive city location?

Ross Finnie: I regret to say that the representatives who were present with me at the meeting found that the discussion on the agricultural strategy and, more important, on CAP reform, did not allow time for that important item to be discussed. I have made it clear—particularly in the evidence that I gave to the Rural Development Committee on Tuesday—that several very important questions need to be asked about the report that the board of the SAC has adopted. In particular, we must question some of the underlying assumptions that have led to the conclusions. I made it clear to the committee that that was a legitimate and proper course of action, and that my department and I have been querying some of the bases on which those conclusions and recommendations have been made.

Alex Fergusson (South of Scotland) (Con): Last week, when answering a question from my colleague David Mundell, the minister was unable to assure the Parliament that a suitable scheme for the uplift of dead stock would be in place when it becomes illegal to bury such stock on farm. Following his discussions with industry representatives, is he able to update the chamber on any further progress that has been made on that issue? Can he guarantee that any farmer who buries dead stock on farm after April will not be prosecuted if no suitable scheme is in place?

Ross Finnie: I am unable to give the firm assurance that I might have wished to give following our discussions, but we continue to make much better progress than we have made in previous months. I remain confident that, following the discussions that are now taking place with the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and the other devolved Administrations, we will have a national scheme. As for prosecution after 1 May, I very much hope that that will not be necessary.

Police (Fife)

2. Mr Keith Harding (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con): To ask the Scottish Executive when it will next meet representatives of Fife police board. (S1O-6712)

The Deputy First Minister and Minister for Justice (Mr Jim Wallace): The Executive is in contact with representatives of police authorities and joint police boards on a regular basis. However, no formal meetings are planned with representatives of the Fife police authority before the elections.

Mr Harding: The minister will be aware that the number of recorded crimes and offences in Fife has got much worse during the four years of this Administration. Can he explain why the Executive's justice policy is failing in Fife?

Mr Wallace: I do not accept the basis of Mr Harding's question. He will find that in Fife, as in other parts of Scotland, police numbers are at record levels. In Fife, there were 920 officers on 31 December 2002, compared with 835 in June 1999. By my reckoning, that is an increase of more than 10 per cent in the number of police officers over the parliamentary session.

We are also allowing more support staff to be engaged, which frees up officers for front-line duty. With regard to the funding that has gone into Fife, the level of grant-aided expenditure there will rise by more than the national average in each of the next three years. This year, there will be a rise of £44.4 million, which will rise to £57.8 million in 2005-06. Those are generous settlements by any stretch of the imagination, and they allow the chief constable of Fife constabulary to deploy additional officers to promote effective law and order policies in Fife.

Helen Eadie (Dunfermline East) (Lab): The minister may have noticed the newspaper reports concerning the recent violent and vicious attack on the Rev David Adams, minister of Trinity parish church, as he was garaging his car late one evening. It was a particularly nasty attack, as the assailants used a Stanley knife on the minister. I have expressed my concern to the chief constable of Fife constabulary about staffing—

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): I am concerned that there must be a question.

Helen Eadie: I would be grateful if the minister would advise me whether he is aware that there are 400 fewer police officers in Fife than there are in Tayside, which has a population only 35,000 greater than Fife. I am very concerned about the level of policing in Fife.

Mr Wallace: I express my profound sympathies to that particular victim of crime. As I suspect that there may be outstanding legal issues and the matter may be sub judice, it would not be proper for me to make further comment. The Administration has a good record of putting victims of crime far more to the fore than has ever been the case previously.

On what Helen Eadie says on funding and on the number of police officers, I have indicated that the number has gone up. She will be aware that there has been a review of the GAE for all police authorities to take into account their levels of activity and arrive at a fair distribution of resources that takes account of changes. As a result of that, Fife will receive an increase greater than the national average over the next three years.

Housing

3. Karen Whitefield (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab): To ask the Scottish Executive what action it will take to ensure decent standards of housing for all. (S1O-6742)

The Minister for Social Justice (Ms Margaret Curran): The Executive is committed to eradicating poor-quality housing. Last week, I announced the recommendations made by the housing improvement task force to improve quality in the private sector. Today, I am launching a consultation paper that sets out our proposals for a new quality standard for all social housing. I am determined to stamp out poor housing and to give people homes that are fit for the 21st century.

Karen Whitefield: Does the minister agree that initiatives such as the regeneration of housing of Petersburn, in my constituency, and the introduction of improved rights for tenants in all social rented housing are making a significant, positive contribution to people throughout Scotland? Does she agree that we must ensure that those same rights are extended to people who rent in the private sector and that we should offer them the same level of protection and a guaranteed minimum standard of housing?

Ms Curran: I am not quite sure of the area to which the member referred—it is perhaps a surrounding village in her constituency. [MEMBERS: "No."] Not quite, apparently. I am sure that if it is a surrounding village in Karen Whitefield's constituency, its regeneration is in very good hands.

The member makes an important point about the rights of tenants in the private sector as well as in the social rented sector. The Executive has made great strides in the past four years to oversee the social rented sector. We have now completed the jigsaw by reviewing the situation in the private sector, and the recommendations of the housing improvement task force contain a package of measures to take us forward in that regard. That applies particularly to standards and a review of the tolerable standard will be going out to consultation. The members of the task force worked very hard to produce a robust package of measures.

Mr Jamie Stone (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD): The minister will know that I have pursued the issue of the level of improvement grants before. There have been endless delays over introducing the new, increased improvement grant for private homes. Will she give an assurance that the delays will be stopped forthwith? Although there will be means testing, if the pot of money stays the same, we may end up with longer waiting lists of very needy people. Will an increase in funding be considered by the Scottish Executive?

Ms Curran: I recognise that there have been delays in implementation. That is because the test of resources has involved a detailed package of work. The matter is being examined at the moment, and the new grant should be ready for implementation as soon as the new parliamentary session begins. However, the member will know that we have changed the funding system for the private sector from borrowing consents to grants, as I announced in November. We estimate that that will lead to an increase in resources from £45 million to £60 million. Therefore we believe that that sector will be considerably boosted.

Mr John Home Robertson (East Lothian) (Lab): I know that the minister shares my concern about the desperate shortage of decent, affordable rented housing in many parts of Scotland. I am particularly concerned about the 6,000 people who are stuck on the waiting list for council houses in East Lothian. Is she aware that East Lothian Council has already started to work out plans to borrow so that up to 2,000 houses for rent can be built under the proposals that she announced, I think last month? Is she further aware that we are looking forward to welcoming her in East Lothian shortly to discuss those plans further?

Ms Curran: My visit to East Lothian is outstanding. I recognise that I made a public commitment to making such a visit and I promise that I will do my best to get there in the next few days.

The announcement of the prudential regime is of particular benefit to councils such as East Lothian. Its announcement means that there is a real opportunity to increase investment in housing in Scotland and to deliver the supply of affordable housing. We now have a complete package that will address the fundamental issues of housing in Scotland. I look forward to my visit to East Lothian because I believe that people there are positive about my announcement, so I expect a warm welcome.

European Maritime Safety Agency

4. Ms Sandra White (Glasgow) (SNP): To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to support the relocation of the European Maritime Safety Agency to Glasgow. (S1O-6716)

The Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning (Iain Gray): As this is a reserved matter, the Executive liaises closely with the UK Government about supporting this case.

Ms White: I presumed that the minister would have been aware of the letters between the Executive and Neil MacCormick MEP, who asked it to support the relocation of the agency in Glasgow. Is the minister aware that Greece, which is another contender for the siting of the agency, has set up a website to support its bid? Should the Executive not liaise with Westminster or the European Parliament to set up such a website to promote Glasgow's bid?

Iain Gray: The Executive has been involved in the preparation of materials to support the bid. We have also mobilised the Executive office in Brussels—an arm of the Scottish Executive—and I believe that officials there have been in contact with MEPs to promote the bid. We would certainly be happy to consider further materials or ways to support it.

Glasgow would provide an excellent base for EMSA. I understand that Genoa, Lisbon, Nantes, and Piraeus have made other bids. However, even an Edinburgh boy such as I knows that Glasgow can readily see off that opposition.

Phil Gallie (South of Scotland) (Con): I welcome the minister's assurance that measures are in hand to present a case for Scotland and Glasgow on this issue. Does he agree that there is plenty of good material for that, especially because of the engineering experience in Scotland and the contribution that coastal communities have made to our merchant navy over many years? Will he drive home that point with his Westminster colleague, because there can be no finer setting for the new European Maritime Safety Agency than Scotland and Glasgow?

Iain Gray: I am happy to accept Mr Gallie's welcome for my first answer and to agree with the further points that he makes. I will take steps to ensure that cognisance is taken both of those points and of the point that was made about websites.

Nursery Schools (Consultation)

5. Alex Neil (Central Scotland) (SNP): To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will consider extending the statutory consultation requirements for the closure or merger of primary schools to nursery schools. (S1O-6704)

The Deputy Minister for Education and Young People (Nicol Stephen): The Scottish Executive would consider extending the statutory consultation requirements for the closure or merger of primary schools to nursery schools, were it not for the fact that those statutory requirements already apply to nursery schools.

Alex Neil: I thank the minister for his reply. Will he ensure that all local authorities, including South Lanarkshire Council, abide by the statutory requirements? I remind him that he has only five weeks to do so before the Executive changes.

Nicol Stephen: I will.

David Mundell (South of Scotland) (Con): Does the Scottish Executive have plans to change the statutory consultation requirements for the merger or closure of primary schools, especially in rural areas? The present procedures do not take into account the impact on local communities of closures of the sort that Dumfries and Galloway Council is planning.

Nicol Stephen: We have no such proposals in this parliamentary session.

Adoption

6. Janis Hughes (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab): To ask the Scottish Executive what action it will take to improve adoption levels. (S1O-6731)

The Minister for Education and Young People (Cathy Jamieson): The Executive is committed to improving the life chances of looked-after children. Phase 1 of our adoption policy review recommended improvements in the recruitment of prospective adopters, post-adoption support and decision-making processes. Phase 2 of the review, which I announced last week, will examine the legal options to provide stability and security for children, whether through adoption or other forms of permanent placement.

Janis Hughes: Does the minister agree that one of the most difficult aspects of the adoption procedure is the length of time that it takes. Will she assure me that the review will consider speeding up the procedure, to lessen the anxiety caused to prospective adoptive parents?

Cathy Jamieson: I am aware, from correspondence from a number of colleagues and representations made by adoptive parents, that one of the difficulties is the length of time that the processes can take. I am therefore committed to ensuring that the review will examine that. It is also important to recognise that, from the child's point of view, we must ensure that the processes meet their needs, particularly where young children are involved.

Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh (Central Scotland) (Con): Does the minister agree, particularly in the light of this morning's debate, that older, more mature couples would be welcome to apply for adoption and that our chosen children deserve the opportunity of a better home?

Cathy Jamieson: I would certainly like us to ensure that the prospective adopters are matched with the needs of individual children. Many children who are currently looked after in the system and who could benefit from adoptive parents are slightly older than the children whom people would traditionally look to adopt. I would encourage anyone who thinks that they could offer a home to those children to make the inquiries and consider it seriously.

Ferry (Ballycastle to Cambeltown)

7. George Lyon (Argyll and Bute) (LD): To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made on the Ballycastle to Campbeltown ferry tendering process. (S1O-6737)

The Deputy Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning (Lewis Macdonald): A tendering process for subsidy to reinstate the service has not attracted any bids so we are now seeking to identify alternative means of reinstating the service within the tender criteria.

George Lyon: I thank the minister for clarifying that matter. There is deep concern in Kintyre that despite the Scottish Executive offering £5 million in subsidy over the lifetime of the five-year contract for the route no ferry company has bid for it. I seek his assurance that every effort will continue to be made to talk to ferry companies, including Caledonian MacBrayne, to ascertain whether any interested parties are out there. I also seek an assurance that the contract on offer will be reconsidered if the current process fails, with a view to tendering again the future.

Lewis Macdonald: I share the concern that George Lyon has expressed to secure the service, to which we are committed. In that regard, because of the failure of bids coming forward, we have approached a number of shipping companies that we believe could conceivably run the service. We have inquired whether there are grounds on which we might be able to make that service happen with their support. It would not be appropriate to go into the names of those companies at this stage, but George Lyon should rest assured that every company that we believe is capable of running the service will be talked to about that matter.

Clearly, if the process fails, ministers would be required to look at what other process could be adopted in order to make the service happen. We want to explore every avenue and we will leave no stone unturned in the current tendering process and criteria to get that service in place.

Mr Duncan Hamilton (Highlands and Islands) (SNP): On positive alternatives, is the minister aware of the success of Neil MacCormick MEP in convincing the European Commission to treat peninsulas in the same way as islands for the provision of additional public service obligations? If so, will he consider having additional routes from Campbeltown, not just to Ballycastle but to the central belt, using the same rationale that we have used in Cowal?

Lewis Macdonald: I confirm that we have talked to the European Commission and have won the case that mainland-to-mainland routes are acceptable for PSOs. That is something that my colleagues and I have been proud to carry forward. It has been important in allowing us to proceed with arrangements both on the Gourock to Dunoon and Tarbert to Portavadie routes. Our focus at this point has to be on the Campbeltown to Ballycastle service, as we have outlined. As I said to George Lyon, we will explore every option to deliver that service before we consider further alternative options.

Air Services (Glasgow to Barra)

8. Mr Duncan Hamilton (Highlands and Islands) (SNP): To ask the Scottish Executive what the current position is on the future of the air service between Glasgow and Barra. (S1O-6703)

The Deputy Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning (Lewis Macdonald): In a parliamentary answer to Alasdair Morrison on 20 March, I announced that Loganair had been awarded the contract for the Barra to Glasgow air service for 2003-04 and that we would tender a new contract from April 2004 to March 2006.

Mr Hamilton: On behalf of the people of Barra, I ask the minister to confirm that the two-year extension to the review period is simply a stay of execution rather than a long-term commitment to the route. Will he take the opportunity of the additional two-year review to guarantee that the Scottish transport appraisal guidance will be met in full before any ultimate decision is taken? I asked him that yesterday and he refused to answer.

Lewis Macdonald: I would not want to talk down the Scottish transport appraisal guidance, as it is a very useful way of assessing transport and economic impacts. I expect that the appraisal criteria that STAG contains will be among the things that are considered in the next two or three years.

We want to take a wider look at the future of air services to Barra. For example, we want to consider social inclusion and access to health services. The local MSP, Alasdair Morrison, and the local council, Comhairle nan Eilean Siar, raised such issues with me—as did the community on Barra—when I visited the island in January. We want to examine those larger issues, so we will consider not only transport appraisal, but other relevant forms of appraisal.

Less Favoured Areas Support (Crofting)

9. John Farquhar Munro (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD): To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will work with the Scottish Crofting Foundation to undertake an investigation into the effectiveness of the current less favoured area support scheme in delivering support to crofting communities in less favoured areas. (S1O-6741)

The Minister for Environment and Rural Development (Ross Finnie): The less favoured area support scheme is kept under review to ensure that it is effective in delivering support across the whole of Scotland's less favoured areas. Officials will work with the industry working group, of which the Scottish Crofting Foundation is a member, to review the implementation of the 2003 scheme.

John Farquhar Munro: If the investigation determines that the current less favoured area support scheme is not delivering effective support, will the minister consider introducing a more appropriate funding structure?

Ross Finnie: The whole purpose of the review will be to determine whether the scheme has been effective. I expect that, as a result of the meetings of the working group, proposals to change the scheme will be produced, if necessary, and that such changes will be put forward to Europe, so that the scheme can be amended for the following year.

Mr Alasdair Morrison (Western Isles) (Lab): I thank the minister for meeting me earlier in the week to discuss the less favoured area support scheme. I seek an assurance from him that officials from Western Isles Council will be involved in the forthcoming discussions on the scheme. I know that the minister is well aware of the excellent work that the council's crofting committee has done in that important area of agricultural support.

Ross Finnie: I am happy to confirm to the member that it will be extremely helpful for the working group to have the advice of the Western Isles Council's crofting committee and its input into our review of the matter to which he and John Farquhar Munro have referred.

Mr Jamie McGrigor (Highlands and Islands) (Con): Will the minister tell me why the less favoured area support scheme is not benefiting crofters in the most severely disadvantaged areas of the Highlands and Islands as much as it is benefiting farmers in areas of Scotland with richer agricultural land? Is not the main point of the less favoured area scheme to help those who are in the less favoured areas?

Ross Finnie: That point is self-evident. The difficulty that Jamie McGrigor has is that 83 per cent of Scotland's agricultural land is defined as less favoured area land. I do not believe for a moment that he is suggesting that it would be beneficial for Scotland to have a reduced amount of less favoured area land, but that is the inference to be drawn from his question. The scheme has been designed to be hugely beneficial to Scotland's agriculture as a whole. It is an agricultural scheme that delivers support. As I have indicated in my responses to Alasdair Morrison and John Farquhar Munro, the review group will keep under review the issue of whether any adjustments are necessary.

Scottish Borders (Economy)

10. Christine Grahame (South of Scotland) (SNP): To ask the Scottish Executive what measures it has taken to promote the economic well-being of the Scottish Borders. (S1O-6709)

The Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning (Iain Gray): A wide range of policies promotes economic well-being. Scottish Enterprise Borders is taking action in line with the direction and priorities that are set out in the Executive's "A Smart, Successful Scotland". The Borders local economic forum allows for the co-ordinated delivery of local economic development activities.

Christine Grahame: As the minister is aware, the draft bill for the Borders rail link was lodged this week. Given that the Borders has suffered a net loss of 500 jobs since Labour came to power and that the modest projection is that even a partial reinstatement of the line to Galashiels would result in the Borders gaining 900 jobs, does he accept that the business case for the railway is staring him in the face? The railway should simply now be built. At a stroke, that would secure the economic well-being of the Scottish Borders.

Iain Gray: As Christine Grahame knows well from previous exchanges, we are keen to see progress on the matter. However, the business case is not staring me in the face because it is not yet with the Executive. I was pleased to see from this week's press that the Waverley rail partnership is making progress—it is about to submit an interim case, which I believe will be with the Executive in the next few days. Next Monday, we enter the period during which it will not be possible to progress that case, but I assure Christine Grahame that the matter will be in my diary for 2 May.

Ian Jenkins (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD): Does the minister agree that, although there are real problems in the Borders economy, there are also real grounds for optimism? The population of the Borders is increasing; the railway is on track; broadband is coming; the Scottish Public Pensions Agency has been established at Tweedbank; farming and tourism are in the process of recovery; there are positive developments in health service infrastructure—

The Presiding Officer: I am interested in the Borders, but I would like a question.

Ian Jenkins: Does the minister agree that none of those things—apart perhaps from the railway—seems to interest Ms Grahame, who prefers to launch lightning raids on the Borders, looking for trouble and fanning the flames before beetling back to Edinburgh to issue inflammatory press releases, which are peppered with half-truths and misinformation?

Iain Gray: I can only agree. I take this opportunity to pay tribute to Mr Jenkins's far more constructive approach both to representing his constituents and the interests of the Borders and to the proceedings of the Parliament. He will be sorely missed.

The Presiding Officer: I call Margo MacDonald.

Dorothy-Grace Elder (Glasgow) (Ind) rose—

The Presiding Officer: A case of mistaken identity. I call Margo MacDonald.

Margo MacDonald (Lothians) (Ind): And I was going to say something nice about you, Presiding Officer.

The Presiding Officer: Let us hear from the right independent.

Margo MacDonald: On the regeneration of the Borders economy, will the minister explain why the Executive has chosen to transfer 270 Scottish Natural Heritage jobs to Inverness rather than to Galashiels? Inverness has a booming economy—this week, only 48 houses were for sale on the market in Inverness. Galashiels is on the opposite side of the economic coin. Further to that, will the minister assure me—I think that I speak for Angus MacKay, Susan Deacon and the other Edinburgh MSPs—[MEMBERS: "Oh!"] They do not mind. They are broad minded. Perhaps other members should try to be so as well.

The Presiding Officer: I know that it is the end of term, but let us have a question.

Margo MacDonald: The question is about the policy of moving 270 jobs. I am in agreement with those other MSPs that I mentioned. I do not agree with the transfer of those jobs in this way at this time. Will the minister assure me that, after I have seen his colleague Ross Finnie tomorrow, the policy will be put on ice?

Iain Gray: The connection between Margo MacDonald's question and the original question is the 200 civil service jobs at the Scottish Public Pensions Agency that were relocated from Edinburgh to Galashiels. I understand that the decision to which she refers is extremely difficult for those who work in SNH to accept. We must work hard to ensure that there is alternative employment for those who cannot move to Inverness. I understand from her question that Margo MacDonald is meeting my colleague Ross Finnie tomorrow, so I do not think that it would be proper for me to comment further.

Schools (Class Sizes)

11. Michael Russell (South of Scotland) (SNP): To ask the Scottish Executive what proposals it has to reduce class sizes. (S1O-6701)

The Minister for Education and Young People (Cathy Jamieson): In response to the national debate on education, we indicated that we would bring forward proposals to reduce class sizes and to improve pupil-teacher ratios at critical stages such as primary 7, secondary 1 and secondary 2, particularly in maths and English.

Michael Russell: How? How much will it cost? Where will the Executive get the money from?

Cathy Jamieson: When this Administration comes back in May, we will introduce fully costed proposals. Those proposals will stand up to scrutiny, unlike the SNP's proposals, which crumbled at the first hard question.

Johann Lamont (Glasgow Pollok) (Lab): Does the minister acknowledge that the size of classes is not the sole factor in determining educational achievement in our schools? In my constituency, the schools with the biggest classes are often those that are highest achieving. Given the minister's commitment to addressing the central issue of inequality in education, will she support initiatives such as the nurture initiative in my constituency, which allows for intensive and close support for some of our most vulnerable children whose broader social needs have to be addressed so that they can access education?

Cathy Jamieson: I take on board the point that Johann Lamont has raised. Of course class sizes are important, but we also need to ensure that resources and support are provided so that we can close the opportunity gap. Many schools have used their resources creatively and have worked hard to overcome the barriers that exist for disadvantaged pupils. I always welcome examples of good practice and like to see it spreading throughout Scotland.

Tommy Sheridan (Glasgow) (SSP): Three months ago, I asked the minister how much she estimated it would cost to lower class sizes to a maximum of 20 in the primary and secondary sectors. Three months ago, she said that she was working on it. Does she know yet how much that would cost?

Cathy Jamieson: I refer the member to the answer that I gave to Mr Russell. We will not make proposals that are not properly costed. We will make proposals that stand up to scrutiny and we will deliver in the same way as we have delivered on reducing class sizes for the first three years of primary education.

Mr Brian Monteith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con): If I may say so, Presiding Officer, you are wearing a rather fetching purple tie—rather like Hibernian Football Club's second colours.

Further to Tommy Sheridan's question, is the minister aware that, when class sizes were reduced to 20 in California, the results included many classrooms with 40 or more children and two teachers, patchy attainment and the hiring of teachers without proper qualifications to meet the demand for additional teachers? Is that what the minister wants? Does she agree that what matters most is teaching quality in Scotland?

Cathy Jamieson: Teaching quality is very important and I am aware of the research to which Mr Monteith refers. It showed that, in some areas, there were advantages in reducing class sizes, particularly for the kind of pupils that Johann Lamont referred to. However, it also highlighted some of the dangers. We have to ensure that we do not fall into the trap of doing the wrong thing in an attempt to raise standards. That is why we will make proposals for those critical stages where we know that there are problems. We will focus on maths and English because we are committed to raising standards of literacy and numeracy. I am sure that Mr Monteith in his very fetching tie will agree with that.

A82 (Tarbet to Inverarnan)

12. Fergus Ewing (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP): To ask the Scottish Executive whether the A82 between Tarbet and Inverarnan is an urgent priority for improvement and should be included in the next round of trunk road improvements in 2003-04. (S1O-6705)

The Deputy Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning (Lewis Macdonald): We recognise the traffic pressures on that length of road and have announced that a route action plan should be put in place as part of the £20 million investment in the rural trunk road network that we announced last week.

Fergus Ewing: That answer shows that fudge remains the Executive's favourite confection. Is the minister aware that temporary traffic lights have been in place on the A82 for more than a decade? Is that acceptable? Does he consider that a period in excess of a decade can properly be described as "temporary"? Does he agree that people and businesses in the west Highlands require a proper, normal trunk road if they are to realise their potential?

Lewis Macdonald: The people of the west Highlands require a proper and objective assessment of the correct way of dealing with precisely the kind of issues that Fergus Ewing has raised, which is why we will draw up a route action plan for the road in question. That is the right way of proceeding.

Mr Ewing will know that, in light of the last round of route action plans, a number of announcements were made last week that affect roads in his constituency, such as the A96 at Delnies and the A9 at Crubenmore and between Kincraig and Dalraddy. I conclude by pointing out that, if his party's spending commitment to invest £500 million in dualling the entire length of the A9 were ever carried out, the consequences for deserving and important roads such as the A82 would be too serious to contemplate.

Jackie Baillie (Dumbarton) (Lab): I welcome the minister's announcement of a new route action plan for the A82 north of Tarbet. Indeed, I have been urging the Executive on behalf of constituents to undertake such work for some time now. Will the minister indicate the time scale for the study and when he expects work on its recommendations to begin? Moreover, when he returns on 2 May, will he consider additional improvements to the A82 from Dumbarton to Tarbet as a key route to Scotland's first national park at Loch Lomond and the Trossachs?

Lewis Macdonald: It is intended that work on the route action plan will start within the next few weeks and be concluded towards the end of next year, in good time for people to make submissions to the strategic roads spending review process that will begin in 2004-05. I very much look forward to discussing with Jackie Baillie proposals for improvements to the A82 in her constituency after 1 May.

Racial Prejudice

13. Scott Barrie (Dunfermline West) (Lab): To ask the Scottish Executive how it is combating racial prejudice among schoolchildren. (S1O-6706)

The Deputy Minister for Education and Young People (Nicol Stephen): The Scottish Executive is working with a number of relevant organisations such as the centre for education for racial equality in Scotland and the Scottish Traveller education programme to take forward our commitment to promoting race equality in schools. Moreover, in conjunction with others, we recently launched a CD-ROM resource that was issued to all schools in Scotland to support staff in the effective delivery of anti-racism education.

Scott Barrie: The minister will be aware that the Race Relations (Amendment) Act 2000 places a general duty on public bodies, including education authorities and schools, to eliminate unlawful racial discrimination and to promote equality and good race relations. How is the Scottish Executive ensuring that schools and education authorities are carrying out their duties under that legislation?

Nicol Stephen: The general duty is also reinforced by a specific duty—with a compliance date of 30 November 2002—on education authorities to come forward with proposals for individual schools to implement a race equality policy. To ensure the act's smooth implementation, the education department set up a race relations act education delivery group, which was made up of a range of key stakeholders, including CERES, the Association of Directors of Education in Scotland, the Educational Institute of Scotland, the Commission for Racial Equality and STEP. That work is on-going and we intend to ensure that all education authorities and schools take their responsibilities in that regard seriously.

Donald Gorrie (Central Scotland) (LD): Will the minister broaden his answer and tell us what the Executive is doing to counter prejudice against English families and prejudice that arises from sectarianism, much of which has a racial background?

Nicol Stephen: As Donald Gorrie knows, we seek to tackle all sorts of prejudice. Indeed, the initiative that I mentioned and other aspects of the Executive's work seek to tackle prejudice that arises from sectarianism or is directed at young people from any country. There was much more to our anti-racism campaign than posters and advertisements. We want the issues to be tackled in our schools and have set up websites with links to resources that teachers can use. During this time of increased international tension, it is especially important that the Scottish Executive does absolutely everything in its power to combat all forms of prejudice and to promote the safety and security of all Scotland's schoolchildren and communities.

First Minister's Question Time

15:10

Prime Minister (Meetings)

1. Mr John Swinney (North Tayside) (SNP): To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister and what issues he intends to discuss. (S1F-2635)

The First Minister (Mr Jack McConnell): I have no immediate plans to meet the Prime Minister, but I plan to speak regularly with him over the coming weeks. In particular, I intend to draw to his attention remarks that Scotland's aid agencies made yesterday. They stressed to me the importance of the United Nations not only in the provision of humanitarian aid in Iraq during and after the conflict, but in the reconstruction of Iraqi society. I am sure that those agencies and others strongly support the Prime Minister's efforts today to convince the American Government to take the same route.

Mr Swinney: I associate myself and my party with the First Minister's remarks about the work of the humanitarian agencies and the primacy of the United Nations in drawing the matter to a conclusion and putting in place the necessary humanitarian assistance.

In a recent keynote speech, Scotland was described as a country that suffers from low growth and population decline, that has the unhealthiest people in Europe, where the environment is spoiled, where we are reluctant to take a risk and quick to blame, and where communities are blighted by violence on Saturday nights. When he made those remarks on Friday, was the First Minister talking Scotland down, or was that just an assessment of the failure of his Government and successive London Governments?

The First Minister: It is a measure of my ambitions for Scotland that those are the issues that require to be addressed. I will be delighted to send Mr Swinney a copy of the whole speech, so that he can see the answers and solutions, as well as the challenges that Scotland faces.

The Parliament has several important functions. It is important that we pass the right legislation, and that we do that in the name of Scotland. It is important that we allocate our budgets and make decisions daily, weekly, monthly and annually in ways that befit the Scotland that we are trying to create. It is also important that we have wider ambitions and that we try to tackle the underlying problems over the years, such as maltreatment of our environment, the culture of violence on a Saturday night, the lack of entrepreneurial culture and a host of other matters. If challenges such as racism and sectarianism are taken on, Scotland will be made a better place. That is exactly what I intend to do as a continuing First Minister.

Mr Swinney: If we have all those problems, that raises a question: who has been running the country for the past 40 or 50 years among the crowd on the other parties' benches?

The First Minister offered to send me a copy of his speech, but he will not be surprised to learn that he does not need to do that, because I have examined his speech closely. It contains a number of interesting ideas. The big idea was a promise to take action against

"dealers who sell drugs to ... children at the school gate".

That idea is admirable, but six years ago in "Labour's covenant with Scotland", the people were made an identical promise by Labour:

"We will ... introduce ... 'drugs cordons' round Scottish schools, whereby anyone caught dealing in drugs within a specified radius will be liable for tougher penalties."

Since that promise was made six years ago, how many drug cordons have been established around Scottish schools and where are they?

The First Minister: It might have escaped Mr Swinney's notice, but the Parliament has been in existence for only four years, not six years. In the past four years, the Parliament has seen serious action being taken on tackling Scotland's drug dealers and tackling drugs in Scotland, such as the establishment of the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency as promised, the staffing of that agency and the additional powers—on which SNP members were not keen—to take the proceeds of crime and put them back into communities to ensure that dealers pay the price for their actions.

Action has been taken throughout Scotland to pull together drug action teams that help those who require local rehabilitation and assistance. Those are the practical measures that the Parliament was meant to take and has taken. Other practical measures will be taken in the next session if we spend the next four years talking not about independence, but about problems in Scotland and how to address them.

Mr Swinney: The only thing that was missing from that answer was the word "none". The commitment that I cited has not been delivered; that is yet another broken promise. No wonder the First Minister read out that litany of failure; it is the failure of this Government.

The First Minister promised that he would cut waiting lists by 10,000. He has broken that promise. He promised that 80 per cent of primary school pupils would achieve appropriate standards in reading and writing. He has broken that promise. He promised to set up drug cordons, but he has broken that promise, too. Given that he has broken so many promises, how can the people of Scotland take seriously any of the First Minister's promises at the forthcoming election? Is not it the case that patients, pupils and victims of crime cannot wait any longer for the Government to deliver? Is not it the case that the people of Scotland should move on and change the Government of Scotland?

The First Minister: It is a pleasure to know that one of only three examples that Mr Swinney quotes—the other two are inaccurate—is an example from six years ago. It was included in a document, which I believe was issued prior to the 1997 general election.

Only one significant promise has been broken in the past 12 months by a politician in Scotland and that was the promise to talk about independence that the leader of the Scottish National Party made last May. We have not heard the word "independence" since—entire party political broadcasts do not even mention the concept, never mind use the word. When we get to the election campaign, we will talk about independence, but we will also talk about education, health, transport, crime and job creation. Those are the priorities for the people of Scotland, which is exactly why they will back us to return after 1 May.

Cabinet (Meetings)

2. David McLetchie (Lothians) (Con): To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S1F-2630)

The First Minister (Mr Jack McConnell): Yesterday's Cabinet was the last scheduled meeting before the Scottish Parliament elections on 1 May. In the current situation, contingency arrangements have been made for the Cabinet to meet during April, should that be necessary.

David McLetchie: Although people's thoughts are at this time invariably focused on the international situation, we all reflect that the war in Iraq is, in part, about establishing a democratic society that has free elections like the one in which we will participate on 1 May.

I return to domestic concerns for my question to the First Minister. After four years of this Labour-Liberal Democrat Executive and no fewer than 53 tax increases, many people in Scotland will be disappointed that violent crime continues to rise, that 19,000 more patients wait for hospital treatment and that the number of new business start-ups has decreased. People will also have been disappointed to learn recently that more than half of the pupils in the second year of our secondary schools do not meet national standards for reading. Does the First Minister share our disappointment and concern? How will more of the same make any difference at all?

The First Minister: Contrary to what Mr McLetchie says, our many achievements include the highest standards in reading and writing that we have seen in our secondary schools in my lifetime and substantial improvements in support for business, not only for business start-ups, but in support that allows existing businesses to grow. We have not only ensured that we have better paid staff and better equipment and facilities in our hospitals; we have brought down waiting times for Scotland's key killer diseases.

I assure Mr McLetchie that, not only have we made those achievements, we have many ambitions. There is much more still to do—that is the challenge for the Parliament in the next four years. We will build on that record and I am sure that it will educate us and lead us to meeting the challenge, and to meeting it successfully.

David McLetchie: The big problem is that the record completely contradicts all the First Minister's assertions. Is not it about time that the he admitted that the centralising and top-down approach to running our public services that has been the feature of the Administration for the past four years has not worked and that it will not work?

Will he explain to people in Scotland why he did not cut his bloated Government down to size by halving the number of ministers who interfere in the running of our affairs? Why has he not cut the rates burden on Scottish businesses that puts them at such a competitive disadvantage compared with businesses south of the border? Why has he not given our doctors and nurses far more say in the running of the national health service in Scotland? I am thinking of foundation hospitals and general practitioner fundholding. Is not it about time that we had a Government in Scotland that does something about such problems rather than one that ignores them?

The First Minister: I am delighted to take up the member's challenge. On a top-down approach and not giving enough local power, not only has the partnership Administration devolved more powers to local authorities and bodies in Scotland than any other Administration in my lifetime, but it has done so successfully. It has worked in partnership with local authorities and many other bodies that deliver services at a local level. We are also devolving power to front-line managers of services who need such power in order to make the right priority decisions at local level.

Furthermore, we have cut the rates burden for Scottish businesses by freezing rates for next year and by giving a firm commitment that, in future years, the rate of inflation will be the maximum by which they will increase. There have been similar achievements for the new Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Executive in a wide range of other areas.

In the next parliamentary session, it is important that we build on our achievements not only by maintaining smaller class sizes in primary schools, but by reducing class sizes in secondary schools. Not only did we build on the 20,000 modern apprenticeships that we promised to deliver, but 30,000 apprenticeships have been delivered for young people. We have put behind us the absolute hopelessness of the 1980s and 1990s and built a Scotland that is fit for the 21st century.

Entitlement Cards

3. Pauline McNeill (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab): To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive has any plans to introduce entitlement cards. (S1F-2640)

The First Minister (Mr Jack McConnell): As part of our commitment to providing people with better public services, we are supporting the development by Scottish local authorities of a citizen's smart card. The card will initially be used for bus travel, school meals and registration, access to some leisure services and as a library card, although other services can be added as required. We plan to make the card available on a voluntary basis.

Pauline McNeill: I appreciate that there can be benefits to such a card, which the First Minister has outlined, but he will be aware of the concerns of many Scots that such a scheme could violate civil rights to privacy if it is not presented properly. In the light of such concerns, will he assure me that the purpose of any entitlement card would be made clear and that there will be full consultation with Scottish communities about it? Will he assure me that all our citizens, including asylum seekers, will not be forced to carry any card that might be seen as an identity card and will not be harassed by police authorities for not carrying such a card?

The First Minister: I am not in favour of compulsion. It is important that such a card is voluntary, which is why we are piloting the card with local authorities that wish to pilot it. It is right that they should have such an opportunity.

I am not, however, in favour of our making it compulsory in Scotland for people to carry several cards in order to access different public services. In an age of modern technology and easy access to other services, it is absolute common sense that people should have easy access to public services and that information be held on one card that will allow people local and national access to public services. If that can be achieved, we will make Scotland a better place to live.

Lord James Douglas-Hamilton (Lothians) (Con): Will the First Minister say what the difference would be between the entitlement card that he suggests and the entitlement card that is being suggested for south of the border? Will he spell out in more detail exactly what information will go into the card?

The First Minister: The Home Secretary has begun a consultation on entitlement cards in the United Kingdom; we will obviously engage with him in that consultation. Such an entitlement card would impact on some devolved areas, so it is important that the Scottish Executive and the Parliament should make representations in due course. However, that is an entirely different concept to the idea that I have just described. A citizen's smart card in Scotland, which local authorities will pilot, can be successful in allowing people in Scotland to get rid of all the clutter of cards and other mechanisms that they use to access local services. There can be access to local and national services through one card, which is an important development. We have been willing to pilot and support such a card and I hope that we can bring it about.

Forth Estuary Transport Authority

4. Nora Radcliffe (Gordon) (LD): To ask the First Minister what discussions the Scottish Executive has had with the Forth Estuary Transport Authority regarding transport options across the Firth of Forth. (S1F-2634)

The First Minister (Mr Jack McConnell): Officials are in regular contact with the Forth Estuary Transport Authority concerning a range of cross-Forth transport issues and we have a seat on its management board.

Nora Radcliffe: I thank the First Minister for that answer. Does he agree that it will be important to run a sustainability slide rule over any proposed new crossing, and that every effort should be made both to maximise the rail capacity over the current rail bridge—for example, by using longer trains—and to consider using the planning framework to group together homes, leisure facilities and jobs in order to cut down commuting?

The First Minister: I have much sympathy for the points that Nora Radcliffe makes. It is important that we maximise the use of existing routes and that we have the rolling stock that allows us to do that. It is also important that, in our planning policies, we design homes and communities in such a way as to reduce the need to travel distances to work or for other purposes. I am happy to take up the points that Nora Radcliffe raises and pass them on to the Forth Estuary Transport Authority.

Schools (British History)

5. Alex Johnstone (North-East Scotland) (Con): To ask the First Minister what commitment the Scottish Executive will give to ensure that British history is adequately covered in the curriculum in schools. (S1F-2627)

The First Minister (Mr Jack McConnell): Guidance to education authorities and schools provides ample opportunities for teaching British history, including Scottish history, at every level of the school curriculum.

Alex Johnstone: The First Minister might be surprised to hear that I was present during the march that took place outside the chamber at half past 5 last Thursday. I assure him that although I did not take part, I felt that it was my duty as an elected member of Parliament to stand by to hear and see what was going on at that march. Does the First Minister agree—given this great country's history of sacrifice in opposing tyranny and oppression wherever it may occur—that it is high time that our young people were made fully aware of the sacrifice that has been made by the generations that preceded us and of the great and distinguished heritage of this country?

The First Minister: I announced towards the end of last year that I thought that it was important that we in Scotland acknowledge a variety of occasions in our history, including the union of the crowns in 1603. I think that it is important, not for party political reasons but for reasons of knowledge, history and understanding, that young people in this country understand all of their roots, where they come from and what our country has done—good and bad—in the past. I certainly hope that in every secondary school and primary school throughout Scotland we not only teach our young people their Scottish history as effectively as possible, but teach them about the time during which they have been part of Britain, which should constitute part of their knowledge and understanding of where they come from. That will also help to inform them of the benefits of democracy, tolerance and respect, which are part of our national character.

Andrew Wilson (Central Scotland) (SNP): Does the First Minister agree that anyone who studies British history should also recognise that Britain was first in the world in economic performance in the 19th century, but is today 19th and falling? We should recognise that many of the countries that became independent from Britain during the intervening period have prospered and that none of the countries that have become independent from Britain want to get back in.

The First Minister: Mr Wilson is full of contradictions; he has just made more. He has spent his four years in the Parliament —when the eyes of business were not upon him—criticising private profit, criticising those who would manage public spending, advocating substantial increases in spending on every occasion and trying to ensure that a culture is created in the Parliament that is hostile to public-private partnerships and other engagements with the private sector. He cannot do that and go round Scotland's boardrooms telling people that he is a friend of business. Mr Wilson must be more consistent. I hope that he will be in the weeks to come.

Mrs Margaret Smith (Edinburgh West) (LD): Does the First Minister agree that one of the strands that goes through British history is the quest for justice? Four years ago, patients who had been infected with hepatitis C from blood products had been waiting many years for justice; they are still waiting for it today. Will the First Minister do all that he can to put pressure on the UK Government to allow the Scottish Executive ministers and the Scottish Parliament to do exactly what we want to do, which is to give fair payments to those who have been infected with hepatitis C?

The Presiding Officer: I am sorry—that was possibly wide of the original question. Does the First Minister want to respond?

The First Minister: I confirm that Malcolm Chisholm will—as he has been doing over recent months—work extremely hard to ensure that we bring about a just conclusion to the matter.

British Sign Language (Interpreters)

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): It is appropriate that the last question in this session of Parliament should be asked by the person who uttered the first words in the Parliament.

6. Dr Winnie Ewing (Highlands and Islands) (SNP): To ask the First Minister whether, in the light of Her Majesty's Government's decision to give official recognition to British sign language as a language in its own right, the Scottish Executive will fund a long-term training programme for more sign language interpreters. (S1F-2624)

The First Minister (Mr Jack McConnell): As a start, I believe that we should double the number of British sign language interpreters in Scotland and I have asked officials to prepare plans for how we might achieve that, which will be presented to whatever set of ministers occupies the Executive offices after the election.

Dr Ewing: That was an encouraging answer.

I am proud to be asking the last question in the Parliament. Since my members' business debate on the subject, during which the public galleries were packed with deaf people, the Executive has taken quite a lot of steps on the issue, such as the type-talk scheme, interpretation for visitors, the BSL video, leaflets and the £10 million for audiological assistance. I am happy to congratulate the Executive on those developments, but is the First Minister aware that the core problems remain? Those problems are the need for formal recognition of BSL, which is an ancient, sophisticated and evolving language, and the emergency shortage of interpreters, which has been referred to.

There are now 39 interpreters; at the time of my members' business debate there were 32. However, Finland has 350 interpreters. There are fifteen BSL students on the go, but because they are part time, they receive no funding. I suggest the practical step of making the Heriot-Watt University course a degree course, which would attract more students and allow them funding as full-time students. That would speed up the process for the many people who would like to be interpreters. The deaf also wish a centre for deaf studies, which could perhaps be considered by whomever succeeds the First Minister—I am optimistic about that.

In yesterday's debate on children, Jackie Baillie said that we want a Scotland where every child matters; I ask that it should be a Scotland where every deaf child matters.

The First Minister: I share Winnie Ewing's commitment to British sign language. As a child, I learned basic BSL from my father. It is not only important that we have enough interpreters in Scotland, but that we encourage recognition of the language's importance to the deaf community, especially to deaf children. We can do a lot more and I am sure that we will do it. One of the marks of this young Parliament during the past four years has been its willingness to do the right thing for Scotland's children. I am sure that we will do that again on this issue in the years to come.

Motion of Thanks

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Mr George Reid): The next item of business is a debate on motion S1M-4063, in the name of the First Minister, on the Presiding Officer.

15:33

The First Minister (Mr Jack McConnell): This is an important occasion. As the proceedings of this four-year session draw to a close, I am delighted to have the honour of moving a motion to pay tribute to our first Presiding Officer, Sir David Steel. Sir David's experience, commitment and the wider role that he has had in his new position have been fundamental to our success as a young Parliament.

The Presiding Officer has been in Scottish politics in many different capacities for nearly 40 years. When I became First Minister, I remember calculating that the average age of members of the Scottish Parliament was about 41 or 42. For those of us in that age range, that means that Sir David became a member of Parliament before we were at primary school and that we were still at secondary school when he became the leader of the Liberal party. He has had a career of distinction and has made a massive contribution to Scotland, the United Kingdom and the liberal movement worldwide.

Sir David's experience, which is not always remembered by those of us who are of a younger generation, has been fundamental to his success in his position and to the on-going success of the Parliament during the past four years. He represented his constituency for 32 years and was leader of the Liberal party for 12 years. Following his retiral as a member of Parliament, he became a life peer and, in 1999, he made the important and exciting choice to return to politics to serve in the Scottish Parliament.

Sir David had also been one of the active leaders of the Scottish constitutional convention, the body that drew up the blueprint from which the Scottish Parliament was to be created. That was highly appropriate for a Presiding Officer. He had been a lifelong campaigner for devolution, and that commitment has shown through over the past four years. Sir David has defended and promoted the founding principles of the Parliament. The informality, courtesy and respect that characterise our proceedings—at least, most of the time—are a tribute to his example to us all. His sure hand and light touch have been shown on many occasions, not least in Aberdeen last year, when he told the story of the white mice when Her Majesty the Queen was present in the chamber.

Despite illness and all that has changed around him, Sir David's presence has given us stability and an opportunity for this young Parliament to grow. There has also been a wider importance to his role. We are fortunate, in this young Parliament, to have had a Presiding Officer with international experience and international interests. There was always a danger of the new Scottish Parliament being a parochial institution. However, a variety of speakers and visitors, such as Thabo Mbeki and others, have visited the Parliament and have engaged with us, and Sir David and other members have represented our new Parliament abroad, especially in the USA on tartan day. Those occasions have served Scotland well, and Sir David has served Scotland well. He has kept our proceedings in a wider perspective, and that has been very important.

That is partly because of the man that he is. In the excellent book by Tom Devine and Paddy Logue that was published last summer, entitled "Being Scottish", in a short essay on his Scottishness, Sir David quotes John Buchan, describing his constituents in the Borders as having

"realism coloured by poetry, a stalwart independence sweetened by courtesy, and a shrewd kindly wisdom".

I can think of no better summary of Sir David Steel, in his role in the Parliament. I commend that to the Parliament this afternoon. He has served us well and I wish Judy and him well in retirement. [Applause.]

I move,

That the Parliament expresses its gratitude to Sir David Steel for his service to the Parliament and recognises the important and historic role he has carried out as its first Presiding Officer.

15:38

Mr John Swinney (North Tayside) (SNP): It is my pleasure to support the motion that has been moved by the First Minister and to recognise the historic event that we are witnessing today. We are a young Parliament, but we are in the process every day of creating a new history and tradition for our Parliament. When the Parliament was constituted, four years ago, my dear colleague Winnie Ewing opened the Parliament with grace and style. Soon after, she was able to hand over to an individual of wise guidance and wise leadership, who has served the Parliament extremely well over the past four years.

It is no easy task to establish the foundations of a new Parliament—politically or in terms of the brickwork. However, the political foundations that have been laid for the Parliament have been characterised by the dignified way in which Sir David has undertaken his responsibilities. He has chaired our proceedings and, as the First Minister said, he has been an ambassador on our behalf and a welcome host to the many international dignitaries who have come to see the emergence of this new institution. He has also established some important principles in the tradition of the Parliament. If I have heard him speaking more often about any one subject in the Parliament, it has been about his desire to see the Parliament's committee system thrive, develop and become ever more influential. Our committee system has distinguished the Parliament from other institutions with which people may be more familiar.

Sir David has been instrumental in defending and protecting Parliament and the rights of Parliament. On occasion, members on the Opposition benches might have liked him to give the Executive an even harder time, procedurally, than he has given it. However, at all times he has acted with fairness and dignity in his work. Sir David and I share a specific objective. He has had a duty, over the past four years, to keep the Parliament under control and to keep the Scottish National Party group within it under control. Occasionally, I have been challenged by the latter task during the past two and half years and I have sympathised with Sir David's challenge when he has occasionally wrestled with that task.

The First Minister referred to the long political career that Sir David has had in Scotland. He entered politics via the 1965 Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles by-election, which he won decisively. However, that by election led to the expulsion from the SNP of an eccentric character called Anthony J C Kerr, who disobeyed the party leadership and decided to stand against Sir David, despite the fact—if memory serves me right—that we were establishing an anti-Tory pact at the time. Some traditions of Scottish politics have not changed much.

It is with the greatest of pleasure that I associate the Scottish National Party with the First Minister's remarks and with the motion. I am not confident that Sir David Steel will be retiring. I cannot imagine that that will be the case. He goes on from his responsibilities as Presiding Officer to act as the Lord High Commissioner to the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland. He will occupy a different seat in this building from the one that he currently occupies, but in that and his future activities he has the good wishes of everyone on this side of the Parliament. [Applause.]

15:41

David McLetchie (Lothians) (Con): On occasions such as this there is the temptation to say, "Oh, for goodness' sake give him the watch and crack open the sherry." [Laughter.] However, that would not do justice to the distinguished service that the Presiding Officer has rendered to Parliament in its first session. I am very pleased indeed to associate my colleagues and me with the First Minister's and Mr Swinney's generous tributes and with the terms of the motion.

When writing his memoirs, the Presiding Officer will no doubt reflect on some of the trials and tribulations of his job. On day one, of course, the Presiding Officer was handed the poisoned chalice of the Holyrood project, which is a responsibility that he has shouldered with commendable commitment but occasionally, some of us might think, with an unwise degree of enthusiasm. The Holyrood project has been a labour of Hercules—unfinished—of which the Presiding Officer will be delighted, no doubt, to be well shot.

Presiding Officers and Speakers in Parliaments are, of course, akin to football referees and it is a measure of Sir David's authority that, after four years, there have been few bookings for dissent and no red cards—yet. Indeed, with the benefit of hindsight, I have to thank the Presiding Officer for preventing me on one occasion from asking questions in the Parliament, which probably did much more for my credibility than if I had actually asked them—such are the ironies and contradictions of politics.

As chair of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, the Presiding Officer has been responsible for the Parliament staff and in thanking him for his contribution over the past four years I would also like to express our thanks to the Parliament staff for the outstanding support and service that they have given to us all in every department and in every respect. [Applause.] I would also like to extend my best wishes to members who, like the Presiding Officer, will retire from Parliament before the election. I thank them for their contributions, particularly those of my colleagues John Young and Ben Wallace.

As the First Minister said, Presiding Officer, you have given outstanding service to public life in Scotland over many years and you will, as John Swinney noted, make an early return to the Assembly Hall in your capacity as Lord High Commissioner to the forthcoming General Assembly. That will be yet another eminent title to add to your burgeoning collection.

And so, Sir David, I say to you: go back to your constituency and prepare for retirement—although that is a prospect that we may all have to face on 1 May. It has been a pleasure to have worked with you over the four years of the Parliament, Sir David, and all of us wish you and Judy many happy and fulfilling years ahead. [Applause.]

15:45

The Deputy First Minister and Minister for Justice (Mr Jim Wallace): Sir David Steel will be pleased and reassured to know that, following debate and discussion at our group meeting on Tuesday evening, the Liberal Democrat group agreed to support the motion.

Although, on taking office as Presiding Officer, Sir David donned the mantle of political neutrality—which we certainly believe that he has maintained—I make no apology for saying that, as a Liberal Democrat, I speak to the motion with warmth and particular personal pleasure.

David Steel led my party in the first three general elections in which I fought and was leader of my party when I entered the House of Commons in 1983. I was subsequently his chief whip—indeed, I was the last chief whip of the Liberal Party and the first chief whip of the newly merged party. We fought many election campaigns together and, as Jack McConnell has reminded us, in 1989, when we joined together in this building in the Scottish constitutional convention, David Steel and Harry Ewing became the honorary joint presidents of the convention. Further, we campaigned, along with many others here, in the successful campaign for a yes-yes vote in the historic 1997 referendum.

Reference has also been made to Judy Steel, and it is important to acknowledge the contribution that she has made, not only over the past few years, but over many years. I well recall the night when Nicol Stephen won the Kincardine and Deeside by-election. After the announcement of the result, a camera went outside the count in Stonehaven where there were a lot of rejoicing Liberal Democrats. David Dimbleby asked, "Who is that woman jumping up and down?" and David Steel replied, "That's no woman; that's my wife." Judy has been a stalwart support and we owe her a debt of gratitude as well.

My father recalls visiting one of his clients in the Borders, the late Andrew Haddon, a stalwart Liberal, who said that the local party had just selected a lad to fight the forthcoming election. He said that he thought that he was good and might go far—and indeed he has. Sir David represented his constituents in Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles and, subsequently, Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale with outstanding distinction. One of the great battles of the earliest part of his career was the attempt to save the Waverley line from the Beeching axe and I am sure that he will be among the first to receive an invitation to be present when the first stretch of new track is laid for the new Borders railway.

There have been some key themes to David Steel's political career during the past 40 years. Those themes have brought consistency coupled with pragmatism and drive, allied to good humour and courage.

An integral characteristic of all great Scots is internationalism. That is a perspective that David Steel shares and has demonstrated throughout his political career. No doubt, that perspective was fostered during his upbringing in Africa, a continent to which he has devoted much time and commitment.

Sir David's commitment to fighting racism and his leading involvement in the anti-apartheid campaign were inspiring to many, and not without political risk. It took a great deal of courage to take that campaign to the Borders of Scotland—that great rugby-loving region—during the 1969-70 South African rugby team tour. However, the stance that Sir David and others took undoubtedly helped to pave the way for the dramatic events that took place in South Africa in the early 1990s.

Sir David's political philosophy has not prevented him from working with others across the narrow party divides—indeed, it may have encouraged him to do so. He has never been narrowly party-focused and has always had a liberal ability to see and value other people's points of view.

The final theme of Sir David's career that I will mention—and the most appropriate, given the context—is that, in keeping with many Liberal leaders, he has always been a staunch proponent of Scottish home rule. He rightly recognised the need for there to be a Scottish Parliament and the tremendous value that would derive from Scots taking greater control of the issues that affect our daily lives. Indeed, I think that Sir David drafted the Scottish Liberal Party's evidence to the Kilbrandon committee in the late 1960s. That commitment, allied to a willingness to work with others and an understanding of the international context within which a devolved Scotland must operate must make it all the more satisfying for him to have been the Presiding Officer of the first Scottish Parliament since 1707. Knowing how much Sir David cherishes this hard-fought-for Parliament has meant that we have had confidence that the rights of the Parliament—and the fundamental role of holding the Executive to account—have been well safeguarded over these past four years.

It would be misleading to suggest that we are gathered here to bid you a final farewell from this place. As David McLetchie and John Swinney have already pointed out, you go out one door but will return in a few weeks' time—six feet above contradiction, though we have never dared to contradict you much down here—as Lord High Commissioner to the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland. As the motion indicates, the role of our first Presiding Officer has indeed been an historic one. Presiding Officer, it is with gratitude and warmth that we congratulate you on the dignified and distinguished way in which you have discharged your duties. [Applause.]

15:51

John Young (West of Scotland) (Con): I find it a great privilege to be speaking on behalf of the SPCB in this tribute to David Steel. He has been a giant in British politics; indeed, his influence and fame has spread far beyond these shores. He has been used by people overseas in a number of different ways, and that is a tremendous tribute to him. The First Minister covered David's political career in some detail—in fact I was tearing up pages of my speech as the other speakers went on ahead of me.

However, one thing that they did not touch on was an election that I am glad David Steel did not win. In the 1980s, he suddenly decided to stand for the European Parliament. He chose the unusual seat of the central region of Italy. The mind boggles to imagine where David would be today if he had won that election. He would probably eat spaghetti every lunchtime, have a lovely villa in Tuscany, speak fluent Italian—and no doubt, end up as the speaker of the Italian Parliament in Rome. He may think that this is a tough mob here, but it ain't nothing compared to that! If he had become the speaker of the Italian Parliament in Rome, I suspect that he would have brought the members under control in the calm manner that he employs all the time.

David has often been criticised in his four years as Presiding Officer. He has seen it in the press and people have been after him about this, that and everything else. We in the corporate body were in a unique position from which to observe his reactions to that criticism. He was always calm and he never lost his temper. His blood pressure might have gone up slightly, but never once can I recall him losing his temper. In fact, he would be a great man to have in the United Nations. During his illness he obviously suffered a great deal, yet he insisted on coming to the corporate body to chair it. All of us greatly admired his bravery and courage during that time—it cannot have been easy.

Not all members will be aware that there has been an interim setting up of an association of former MSPs, of which I am the interim chairman—and I hasten to add the word interim. Sir David Steel has agreed to be the honorary president of that organisation and I am pleased to say that that outstanding politician for Scotland, Winnie Ewing, has agreed to be the honorary vice-president. With those calming influences, it will be a very effective body indeed once it is fully set up.

I wish David, Judy and the family well. I know that David has written at least 12 books on a variety of subjects, and I am quite sure that he will produce many more. The book that I will stand in a queue to buy, even if the price is 30 guineas a time, is the one that tells the inside story of the Scottish Parliament's first four years and the corporate body. I wish you the best of luck, David.

15:54

The Minister for Parliamentary Business (Patricia Ferguson): On behalf of the members of the Parliamentary Bureau, both past and present, I have great pleasure in taking the opportunity to say a few words before you go into your semi-retirement—like other members, I am sure that it will be no more than that.

As colleagues know, Sir David, for the first couple of years of this Parliament I had the honour of being one of those who assisted you in chairing meetings of the Parliament and in your other duties. I therefore have a unique vantage point from which to view your work and your contribution. I should probably say that a number of members have asked me if I am going to reveal at this point whether a certain conversation on the subject of whether the Presiding Officer should wear robes ever actually took place. I can assure you that my lips are sealed—on that question at least. We are politicians going into an election period, after all.

My office was keen to press-release my contribution in advance of the debate. I have to admit that I was a little unsure about that, and I decided to take some advice from my colleague, Angus MacKay. [Laughter.] Angus advised me in no uncertain terms that it was probably not very wise to issue such a press release today.

But seriously, I know that my fellow business managers, past and present, have very much appreciated your fairness and even-handedness in chairing the Parliamentary Bureau, a body that is often regarded by colleagues who have not had the privilege of serving on it as being some kind of secretive club—which we know is not the case. You have helped to make the bureau what it is today. This might come as a surprise to some colleagues, but it is usually a consensual body; more often than not we find ourselves in agreement.

The whole Parliament admires the way in which you have persisted, often in the face of criticism, steadfastly to maintain the integrity of the Enric Miralles design for the new Parliament building. The Parliament also admires the personal interest that you have taken in that project, as chair of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, over the past four years. As an ambassador for the Parliament, you have worked tirelessly, visiting other Parliaments and organisations abroad and welcoming visitors from abroad to this new Parliament.

I believe that the Parliament has developed well in its short life, and that all its members have played a role in that development. The role of its Presiding Officer has been particularly important in shaping it. It seems absolutely no time at all since the day, almost four years ago, that you were elected to the office of Presiding Officer of the Scottish Parliament. Most of us had very little idea at that time about what the job of the Presiding Officer would actually entail, or about how it would fit into the overall life of the Parliament. It is the mark of the way in which you have developed that post that anyone aspiring to the role in future will have absolutely no doubt as to what is required of them. The post requires a leader. It requires someone who is approachable, someone with dignity, someone who can act with fairness at all times, and whose commitment to the Parliament is unstinting.

We thank you, Sir David, as well as George Reid, Murray Tosh and all the staff who have assisted you in your role, for the dedication that you have shown to the role of Presiding Officer and to this new Parliament. I have great pleasure in supporting the motion before us.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: It is with real pleasure, Sir David, that I ask you to reply to the debate.

15:58

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): I see that I have less than two minutes in which to do so, Deputy Presiding Officer.

It is especially pleasing to listen to all those kind words when I reckon that I am probably the only one of the 129 MSPs who has inevitably, at some time or other over the past four years, disappointed, irritated, upset or offended every one of the other 128. Although I may have made 128 temporary enemies, I feel that I leave having made 128 permanent friends and I thank members for that.

I would like the thanks to me to be linked directly to thanks to the nearly 500 staff whom we employ in our seven buildings, both those whom we see and those whom we never see. From porters to policemen and from caterers to clerks, we have built a dedicated and highly professional parliamentary staff force, to whom not just I, but all of us, are genuinely and deeply grateful. In particular, I thank those who work in my private office and our chief executive, Paul Grice, who I think has given outstanding leadership to the team.

I also thank the Deputy Presiding Officers, George Reid, Patricia Ferguson and Murray Tosh, for the prodigious amount of work that they have undertaken on your behalf, and especially for their work during my illness. We worked as a team, especially in welcoming the unexpectedly large number of distinguished visitors who came to visit us from overseas.

I would like to thank the Parliamentary press corps. [MEMBERS: "Boo!"] No, I know that members will understand that it is one of the greatest sadnesses of my life that I have never been able to see them or know who is or is not in the press gallery.

We have had the odd grumble about press coverage, and I commend to you the MSP who recently decided to do something personally to obtain positive coverage. He invited the Lawnmarket gang to a trendy pub in Leith and produced his well-trained Labrador. He threw a stick into the sea for it to fetch. The dog walked across the water, picked up the stick and walked back across the water to the astonishment of the assembled hacks. The next morning, the member opened his newspaper to read the headline "MSP's dog can't swim".

In spite of the occasional negatives, we ought to record that unquestionably the scale of attention that the Parliament has received from press and broadcasting has turned us remarkably quickly into the focus of our national life. In fact, a recent poll found that only 13 per cent of the public would like to have us abolished and yearned for a return to total rule from inaccessible Westminster. Note that that is a much smaller percentage than those who voted no in the referendum.

The Parliament has had, on occasion, justified critics but, in the light of all that has been done in the past four years, few seriously argue that we should revert to being what Malcolm Rifkind accurately described as the only nation in the world with its own legal system but no legislature to adapt, modernise and improve it. In fact, we are all aware that the heavy legislative programme that we have experienced was partly the result of taking up several long-standing, overdue reforms that never made it into the Westminster queue. In the next session, I expect that still more time may be spent on committee inquiries and scrutiny. I am fully confident that the Parliament will grow in strength and effectiveness.

Now most of you are off to contest the election. As I explained to my daughter when she asked for my help in her forthcoming fight for a council seat, I can play no part in that. She gave me the ominous response, "But babysitting is not a party-political activity."

I tried hard to think of something impartial, but new and original, to say to all of you as you go out hoping to come back with your party having won the election—for example: go back to your constituencies and prepare for government. However, that line has already been taken.

I want to end by thanking all of you for the privilege of having been your Presiding Officer. I use the word privilege deliberately. When I was a student, I used to make speeches frequently on two topics: anti-apartheid and pro-Scottish self-government. If someone had then tapped me on the shoulder and said, "One day, my boy, you will preside over a Scottish Parliament and introduce to it someone with whom you will have worked over several years—the President of a democratic South Africa," I would not have believed them.

That is just one among many reasons that I end simply by wishing you all well and saying thank you, thank you, thank you. [Applause.]

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The question is, that motion S1M-4063, in the name of the First Minister, on the Presiding Officer, be agreed to.

Motion agreed to.

That the Parliament expresses its gratitude to Sir David Steel for his service to the Parliament and recognises the important and historic role he has carried out as its first Presiding Officer.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The motion is agreed to unanimously. For the last time, I hand back the chair to Sir David Steel.

Decision Time

16:04

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): There are three questions that I must put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S1M-4064.2, in the name of Kenneth Gibson, which seeks to amend motion S1M-4064, in the name of Margaret Curran, on closing the opportunity gap for older people, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

Members: No.

The Presiding Officer: There will be a division.

FOR

Adam, Brian (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Campbell, Colin (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Canavan, Dennis (Falkirk West)
Ewing, Dr Winnie (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Ewing, Fergus (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP)
Fabiani, Linda (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Gibson, Mr Kenneth (Glasgow) (SNP)
Grahame, Christine (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Hamilton, Mr Duncan (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Hyslop, Fiona (Lothians) (SNP)
Ingram, Mr Adam (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Lochhead, Richard (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Marwick, Tricia (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Matheson, Michael (Central Scotland) (SNP)
McGugan, Irene (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
McLeod, Fiona (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Morgan, Alasdair (Galloway and Upper Nithsdale) (SNP)
Neil, Alex (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Paterson, Mr Gil (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Quinan, Mr Lloyd (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Robison, Shona (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Russell, Michael (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Stevenson, Stewart (Banff and Buchan) (SNP)
Sturgeon, Nicola (Glasgow) (SNP)
Swinney, Mr John (North Tayside) (SNP)
Welsh, Mr Andrew (Angus) (SNP)
White, Ms Sandra (Glasgow) (SNP)
Wilson, Andrew (Central Scotland) (SNP)

AGAINST

Aitken, Bill (Glasgow) (Con)
Alexander, Ms Wendy (Paisley North) (Lab)
Baillie, Jackie (Dumbarton) (Lab)
Barrie, Scott (Dunfermline West) (Lab)
Boyack, Sarah (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
Brankin, Rhona (Midlothian) (Lab)
Brown, Robert (Glasgow) (LD)
Butler, Bill (Glasgow Anniesland) (Lab)
Chisholm, Malcolm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab)
Craigie, Cathie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab)
Curran, Ms Margaret (Glasgow Baillieston) (Lab)
Davidson, Mr David (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Deacon, Susan (Edinburgh East and Musselburgh) (Lab)
Douglas-Hamilton, Lord James (Lothians) (Con)
Eadie, Helen (Dunfermline East) (Lab)
Ferguson, Patricia (Glasgow Maryhill) (Lab)
Fergusson, Alex (South of Scotland) (Con)
Finnie, Ross (West of Scotland) (LD)
Fitzpatrick, Brian (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)
Fraser, Murdo (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Gallie, Phil (South of Scotland) (Con)
Gillon, Karen (Clydesdale) (Lab)
Godman, Trish (West Renfrewshire) (Lab)
Goldie, Miss Annabel (West of Scotland) (Con)
Gorrie, Donald (Central Scotland) (LD)
Grant, Rhoda (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Gray, Iain (Edinburgh Pentlands) (Lab)
Harding, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Henry, Hugh (Paisley South) (Lab)
Home Robertson, Mr John (East Lothian) (Lab)
Hughes, Janis (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab)
Jackson, Dr Sylvia (Stirling) (Lab)
Jackson, Gordon (Glasgow Govan) (Lab)
Jamieson, Cathy (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab)
Jamieson, Margaret (Kilmarnock and Loudoun) (Lab)
Jenkins, Ian (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD)
Johnstone, Alex (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Livingstone, Marilyn (Kirkcaldy) (Lab)
Lyon, George (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
Macdonald, Lewis (Aberdeen Central) (Lab)
Macintosh, Mr Kenneth (Eastwood) (Lab)
MacKay, Angus (Edinburgh South) (Lab)
Maclean, Kate (Dundee West) (Lab)
Macmillan, Maureen (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Martin, Paul (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab)
McAllion, Mr John (Dundee East) (Lab)
McAveety, Mr Frank (Glasgow Shettleston) (Lab)
McCabe, Mr Tom (Hamilton South) (Lab)
McConnell, Mr Jack (Motherwell and Wishaw) (Lab)
McGrigor, Mr Jamie (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
McIntosh, Mrs Lyndsay (Central Scotland) (Con)
McLeish, Henry (Central Fife) (Lab)
McLetchie, David (Lothians) (Con)
McMahon, Michael (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab)
McNeil, Mr Duncan (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab)
McNeill, Pauline (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab)
McNulty, Des (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab)
Monteith, Mr Brian (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Morrison, Mr Alasdair (Western Isles) (Lab)
Muldoon, Bristow (Livingston) (Lab)
Mulligan, Mrs Mary (Linlithgow) (Lab)
Mundell, David (South of Scotland) (Con)
Munro, John Farquhar (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD)
Murray, Dr Elaine (Dumfries) (Lab)
Oldfather, Irene (Cunninghame South) (Lab)
Peattie, Cathy (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Radcliffe, Nora (Gordon) (LD)
Raffan, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (LD)
Robson, Euan (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD)
Rumbles, Mr Mike (West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine) (LD)
Scanlon, Mary (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Scott, John (Ayr) (Con)
Scott, Tavish (Shetland) (LD)
Simpson, Dr Richard (Ochil) (Lab)
Smith, Elaine (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab)
Smith, Iain (North-East Fife) (LD)
Smith, Mrs Margaret (Edinburgh West) (LD)
Stephen, Nicol (Aberdeen South) (LD)
Stone, Mr Jamie (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
Thomson, Elaine (Aberdeen North) (Lab)
Wallace, Ben (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Wallace, Mr Jim (Orkney) (LD)
Watson, Mike (Glasgow Cathcart) (Lab)
Whitefield, Karen (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab)
Young, John (West of Scotland) (Con)

ABSTENTIONS

Elder, Dorothy-Grace (Glasgow) (Ind)
Harper, Robin (Lothians) (Grn)
MacDonald, Margo (Lothians) (Ind)

The Presiding Officer: The result of the division is: For 28, Against 85, Abstentions 3.

Amendment disagreed to.

The Presiding Officer: The next question is, that amendment S1M-4064.1, in the name of Keith Harding, which seeks to amend Margaret Curran's motion on the opportunity gap for older people, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

Members: No.

The Presiding Officer: There will be a division.

FOR

Aitken, Bill (Glasgow) (Con)
Campbell, Colin (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Davidson, Mr David (North East Scotland) (Con)
Douglas-Hamilton, Lord James (Lothians) (Con)
Ewing, Dr Winnie (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Ewing, Fergus (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP)
Ewing, Mrs Margaret (Moray) (SNP)
Fabiani, Linda (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Fergusson, Alex (South of Scotland) (Con)
Fraser, Murdo (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Gallie, Phil (South of Scotland) (Con)
Gibson, Mr Kenneth (Glasgow) (SNP)
Goldie, Miss Annabel (West of Scotland) (Con)
Grahame, Christine (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Hamilton, Mr Duncan (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Harding, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Hyslop, Fiona (Lothians) (SNP)
Ingram, Mr Adam (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Johnstone, Alex (North East Scotland) (Con)
Lochhead, Richard (North East Scotland) (SNP)
MacAskill, Mr Kenny (Lothians) (SNP)
Marwick, Tricia (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Matheson, Michael (Central Scotland) (SNP)
McGrigor, Mr Jamie (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
McGugan, Irene (North East Scotland) (SNP)
McIntosh, Mrs Lyndsay (Central Scotland) (Con)
McLeod, Fiona (West of Scotland) (SNP)
McLetchie, David (Lothians) (Con)
Monteith, Mr Brian (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Morgan, Alasdair (Galloway and Upper Nithsdale) (SNP)
Mundell, David (South of Scotland) (Con)
Neil, Alex (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Paterson, Mr Gil (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Quinan, Mr Lloyd (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Robison, Shona (North East Scotland) (SNP)
Russell, Michael (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Scanlon, Mary (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Scott, John (Ayr) (Con)
Stevenson, Stewart (Banff and Buchan) (SNP)
Sturgeon, Nicola (Glasgow) (SNP)
Swinney, Mr John (North Tayside) (SNP)
Wallace, Ben (North East Scotland) (Con)
Welsh, Mr Andrew (Angus) (SNP)
White, Ms Sandra (Glasgow) (SNP)
Wilson, Andrew (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Young, John (West of Scotland) (Con)

AGAINST

Adam, Brian (North East Scotland) (SNP)
Alexander, Ms Wendy (Paisley North) (Lab)
Baillie, Jackie (Dumbarton) (Lab)
Barrie, Scott (Dunfermline West) (Lab)
Boyack, Sarah (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
Brankin, Rhona (Midlothian) (Lab)
Brown, Robert (Glasgow) (LD)
Butler, Bill (Glasgow Anniesland) (Lab)
Canavan, Dennis (Falkirk West)
Chisholm, Malcolm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab)
Craigie, Cathie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab)
Curran, Ms Margaret (Glasgow Baillieston) (Lab)
Deacon, Susan (Edinburgh East and Musselburgh) (Lab)
Eadie, Helen (Dunfermline East) (Lab)
Ferguson, Patricia (Glasgow Maryhill) (Lab)
Finnie, Ross (West of Scotland) (LD)
Fitzpatrick, Brian (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)
Gillon, Karen (Clydesdale) (Lab)
Godman, Trish (West Renfrewshire) (Lab)
Gorrie, Donald (Central Scotland) (LD)
Grant, Rhoda (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Gray, Iain (Edinburgh Pentlands) (Lab)
Henry, Hugh (Paisley South) (Lab)
Home Robertson, Mr John (East Lothian) (Lab)
Hughes, Janis (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab)
Jackson, Dr Sylvia (Stirling) (Lab)
Jackson, Gordon (Glasgow Govan) (Lab)
Jamieson, Cathy (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab)
Jamieson, Margaret (Kilmarnock and Loudoun) (Lab)
Jenkins, Ian (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD)
Livingstone, Marilyn (Kirkcaldy) (Lab)
Lyon, George (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
Macdonald, Lewis (Aberdeen Central) (Lab)
Macintosh, Mr Kenneth (Eastwood) (Lab)
MacKay, Angus (Edinburgh South) (Lab)
Maclean, Kate (Dundee West) (Lab)
Macmillan, Maureen (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Martin, Paul (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab)
McAllion, Mr John (Dundee East) (Lab)
McAveety, Mr Frank (Glasgow Shettleston) (Lab)
McCabe, Mr Tom (Hamilton South) (Lab)
McConnell, Mr Jack (Motherwell and Wishaw) (Lab)
McLeish, Henry (Central Fife) (Lab)
McMahon, Michael (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab)
McNeil, Mr Duncan (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab)
McNeill, Pauline (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab)
McNulty, Des (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab)
Morrison, Mr Alasdair (Western Isles) (Lab)
Muldoon, Bristow (Livingston) (Lab)
Mulligan, Mrs Mary (Linlithgow) (Lab)
Munro, John Farquhar (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD)
Murray, Dr Elaine (Dumfries) (Lab)
Oldfather, Irene (Cunninghame South) (Lab)
Peattie, Cathy (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Radcliffe, Nora (Gordon) (LD)
Raffan, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (LD)
Robson, Euan (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD)
Rumbles, Mr Mike (West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine) (LD)
Scott, Tavish (Shetland) (LD)
Simpson, Dr Richard (Ochil) (Lab)
Smith, Elaine (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab)
Smith, Iain (North East Fife) (LD)
Smith, Mrs Margaret (Edinburgh West) (LD)
Stephen, Nicol (Aberdeen South) (LD)
Stone, Mr Jamie (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
Thomson, Elaine (Aberdeen North) (Lab)
Wallace, Mr Jim (Orkney) (LD)
Watson, Mike (Glasgow Cathcart) (Lab)
Whitefield, Karen (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab)

ABSTENTIONS

Elder, Dorothy-Grace (Glasgow) (Ind)
Harper, Robin (Lothians) (Grn)
MacDonald, Margo (Lothians) (Ind)

The Presiding Officer: The result of the division is: For 46, Against 69, Abstentions 3.

Amendment disagreed to.

The Presiding Officer: The next question is, that motion S1M-4064, in the name of Margaret Curran, on closing the opportunity gap for older people, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

Members: No.

The Presiding Officer: There will be a division.

FOR

Aitken, Bill (Glasgow) (Con)
Alexander, Ms Wendy (Paisley North) (Lab)
Baillie, Jackie (Dumbarton) (Lab)
Barrie, Scott (Dunfermline West) (Lab)
Boyack, Sarah (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
Brankin, Rhona (Midlothian) (Lab)
Brown, Robert (Glasgow) (LD)
Butler, Bill (Glasgow Anniesland) (Lab)
Chisholm, Malcolm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab)
Craigie, Cathie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab)
Curran, Ms Margaret (Glasgow Baillieston) (Lab)
Davidson, Mr David (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Deacon, Susan (Edinburgh East and Musselburgh) (Lab)
Douglas-Hamilton, Lord James (Lothians) (Con)
Eadie, Helen (Dunfermline East) (Lab)
Ferguson, Patricia (Glasgow Maryhill) (Lab)
Fergusson, Alex (South of Scotland) (Con)
Finnie, Ross (West of Scotland) (LD)
Fitzpatrick, Brian (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)
Fraser, Murdo (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Gallie, Phil (South of Scotland) (Con)
Gillon, Karen (Clydesdale) (Lab)
Godman, Trish (West Renfrewshire) (Lab)
Goldie, Miss Annabel (West of Scotland) (Con)
Gorrie, Donald (Central Scotland) (LD)
Grant, Rhoda (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Gray, Iain (Edinburgh Pentlands) (Lab)
Harding, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Harper, Robin (Lothians) (Grn)
Henry, Hugh (Paisley South) (Lab)
Home Robertson, Mr John (East Lothian) (Lab)
Hughes, Janis (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab)
Jackson, Dr Sylvia (Stirling) (Lab)
Jackson, Gordon (Glasgow Govan) (Lab)
Jamieson, Cathy (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab)
Jamieson, Margaret (Kilmarnock and Loudoun) (Lab)
Jenkins, Ian (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD)
Johnstone, Alex (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Livingstone, Marilyn (Kirkcaldy) (Lab)
Lyon, George (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
Macdonald, Lewis (Aberdeen Central) (Lab)
Macintosh, Mr Kenneth (Eastwood) (Lab)
MacKay, Angus (Edinburgh South) (Lab)
Maclean, Kate (Dundee West) (Lab)
Macmillan, Maureen (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Martin, Paul (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab)
McAllion, Mr John (Dundee East) (Lab)
McAveety, Mr Frank (Glasgow Shettleston) (Lab)
McCabe, Mr Tom (Hamilton South) (Lab)
McConnell, Mr Jack (Motherwell and Wishaw) (Lab)
McGrigor, Mr Jamie (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
McIntosh, Mrs Lyndsay (Central Scotland) (Con)
McLeish, Henry (Central Fife) (Lab)
McLetchie, David (Lothians) (Con)
McMahon, Michael (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab)
McNeil, Mr Duncan (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab)
McNeill, Pauline (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab)
McNulty, Des (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab)
Monteith, Mr Brian (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Morrison, Mr Alasdair (Western Isles) (Lab)
Muldoon, Bristow (Livingston) (Lab)
Mulligan, Mrs Mary (Linlithgow) (Lab)
Mundell, David (South of Scotland) (Con)
Munro, John Farquhar (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD)
Murray, Dr Elaine (Dumfries) (Lab)
Oldfather, Irene (Cunninghame South) (Lab)
Peattie, Cathy (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Radcliffe, Nora (Gordon) (LD)
Raffan, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (LD)
Robson, Euan (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD)
Rumbles, Mr Mike (West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine) (LD)
Scanlon, Mary (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Scott, John (Ayr) (Con)
Scott, Tavish (Shetland) (LD)
Simpson, Dr Richard (Ochil) (Lab)
Smith, Elaine (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab)
Smith, Iain (North-East Fife) (LD)
Smith, Mrs Margaret (Edinburgh West) (LD)
Stephen, Nicol (Aberdeen South) (LD)
Stone, Mr Jamie (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
Thomson, Elaine (Aberdeen North) (Lab)
Wallace, Ben (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Wallace, Mr Jim (Orkney) (LD)
Watson, Mike (Glasgow Cathcart) (Lab)
Whitefield, Karen (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab)
Young, John (West of Scotland) (Con)

ABSTENTIONS

Adam, Brian (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Campbell, Colin (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Canavan, Dennis (Falkirk West)
Elder, Dorothy-Grace (Glasgow) (Ind)
Ewing, Dr Winnie (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Ewing, Fergus (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP)
Ewing, Mrs Margaret (Moray) (SNP)
Fabiani, Linda (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Gibson, Mr Kenneth (Glasgow) (SNP)
Grahame, Christine (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Hamilton, Mr Duncan (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Hyslop, Fiona (Lothians) (SNP)
Ingram, Mr Adam (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Lochhead, Richard (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
MacAskill, Mr Kenny (Lothians) (SNP)
MacDonald, Margo (Lothians) (Ind)
Marwick, Tricia (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Matheson, Michael (Central Scotland) (SNP)
McGugan, Irene (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
McLeod, Fiona (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Morgan, Alasdair (Galloway and Upper Nithsdale) (SNP)
Neil, Alex (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Paterson, Mr Gil (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Quinan, Mr Lloyd (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Robison, Shona (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Russell, Michael (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Stevenson, Stewart (Banff and Buchan) (SNP)
Sturgeon, Nicola (Glasgow) (SNP)
Swinney, Mr John (North Tayside) (SNP)
Welsh, Mr Andrew (Angus) (SNP)
White, Ms Sandra (Glasgow) (SNP)
Wilson, Andrew (Central Scotland) (SNP)

The Presiding Officer: The result of the division is: For 86, Against 0, Abstentions 32.

Motion agreed to.

That the Parliament welcomes the Scottish Executive's commitment to close the opportunity gap for Scotland's older people by building first-class public services and developing initiatives in health, transport and other priority areas, which will support older people in living healthy, active and independent lives.

The Presiding Officer: That concludes decision time. I now close the final meeting of the first session of the Scottish Parliament 1999-2003.

Meeting closed at 16:08.

Session 1 (2000)

Scottish Parliament
Official Report

Vol 08 No 02

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

CONTENTS

Thursday 7 September 2000

Debates

REGULATION OF INVESTIGATORY POWERS (SCOTLAND) BILL: TIMETABLE
Motion moved—[Mr McCabe]—and agreed to.
The Minister for Parliament (Mr Tom McCabe)
REGULATION OF INVESTIGATORY POWERS (SCOTLAND) BILL: STAGE 3
QUESTION TIME
SCOTTISH EXECUTIVE
Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982
Creative Industries
Dental Services
Ferry Services
Genetically Modified Organisms
Liquid Petroleum Gas (Conversion Grants)
National Health Service
National Health Service
Roads (A96)
Sutherland Report
Water (Fluoridation)

FIRST MINISTER'S QUESTION TIME
SCOTTISH EXECUTIVE
Cabinet (Meetings)
Correction
Drugs
Less Favoured Areas Scheme
Local Government (Pay)
Scottish Cabinet

REGULATION OF INVESTIGATORY POWERS (SCOTLAND) BILL
Motion moved—[Mr Jim Wallace].
The Deputy First Minister and Minister for Justice (Mr Jim Wallace)
Michael Matheson (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh (Central Scotland) (Con)
Scott Barrie (Dunfermline West) (Lab)
Euan Robson (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD)
Gordon Jackson (Glasgow Govan) (Lab)
Donald Gorrie (Central Scotland) (LD)
Phil Gallie (South of Scotland) (Con)
The Deputy Minister for Justice (Angus MacKay)
DECISION TIME
SCOTS AND GAELIC
Motion debated—[Irene McGugan].
Irene McGugan (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Cathy Peattie (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Mr Jamie McGrigor (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Mr John Munro (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD)
Dr Winnie Ewing (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Rhoda Grant (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Mr Jamie Stone (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
Alex Johnstone (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Colin Campbell (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Maureen Macmillan (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Michael Russell (South of Scotland) (SNP)
The Deputy Minister for Highlands and Islands and Gaelic (Mr Alasdair Morrison)


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Scottish Parliament

Thursday 7 September 2000

[THE DEPUTY PRESIDING OFFICER opened the meeting at 09:30]

Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Bill: Timetable

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Mr George Reid): The first item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Tom McCabe to move business motion S1M-1148, which is a timetabling motion in relation to today's stage 3 consideration of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Bill. Any members who wish to speak against the motion should press their request-to-speak buttons now.

09:31

The Minister for Parliament (Mr Tom McCabe): I shall say a few words before moving the motion. All parties in the Parliamentary Bureau have agreed to the timetabling motion on this occasion, which has not always been the case in the recent past. The motion allows generous time for debate, which compares favourably with the time taken in the Justice and Home Affairs Committee at stage 2 of the bill and protects the time for discussion on the sections of the bill in which members are most interested.

I move,

That the Parliament agrees that for Stage 3 of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Bill, debate on each part of the proceedings, if not previously brought to a conclusion, shall be brought to conclusion no later than the following times after commencement of the Stage 3 proceedings—

Group 1 to Group 5 - 1 hour 30 minutes
Group 6 to Group 9 - 2 hours 30 minutes
Group 10 to Group 13 - 3 hours
Group 14 to Group 17 - 4 hours
Motions to pass the Bill - 4 hours 30 minutes

The Deputy Presiding Officer: As no member has asked to speak against the motion, I shall put the question. The question is, that motion S1M-1148, in the name of Tom McCabe, be agreed to.

Motion agreed to.

Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Bill: Stage 3

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Mr George Reid): We now move to stage 3 consideration of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Bill. I shall begin by making the usual announcement about the procedures that will be followed.

Members will be becoming increasingly familiar with the procedures. First, we shall deal with amendments to the bill and then we shall move on to a debate on the question that the bill be passed. For the first part of the proceedings, members should have copies of the bill—document SP Bill 16A—as amended at stage 2, the marshalled list containing all amendments selected for debate, and the groupings that have been agreed. Where appropriate, amendments will be debated in groups. Each amendment will be disposed of in turn, and an amendment that has been moved may be withdrawn with the agreement of the members present. It is, of course, possible for members not to move amendments should they so wish. The electronic voting system will be used for all divisions. I shall allow an extended voting period of two minutes for the first division that occurs after each debate on a group of amendments.

Section 1—Conduct to which this Act applies

The Deputy Minister for Justice (Angus MacKay): Amendment 25, in the name of Jim Wallace, is designed to provide that surveillance that involves a device or person on residential premises or in a private vehicle, but which is targeted on someone who is outside the premises or vehicle, would be classed as directed, rather than intrusive, surveillance.

The bill recognises that there are degrees of invasion of privacy; in our view, the expectation of privacy would clearly be highest within a person's home or private vehicle. The most important factor in deciding the extent to which an individual's privacy is likely to be invaded is the location of the target, as opposed to where the surveillance devices are located.

Under the bill, surveillance that is targeted on someone within a residential premises or private vehicle is rightly classed as intrusive surveillance. However, an individual's expectation of privacy is clearly far less if they are in a public place. For example, people walking down the street are aware that they can be seen from the windows of houses overlooking that street. For that reason, surveillance targeted on a person who is outside residential premises or outside a private vehicle clearly does not, in our view, justify an authorisation for intrusive surveillance, irrespective of where the surveillance device itself is located.

I move amendment 25.

Euan Robson (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD): I would like the minister to clarify whether, if someone moves from a domestic premises out of doors, the type of surveillance would change. I am not clear about the purpose of the amendment—if one was applying for an order for intrusive surveillance, one would also have to apply for an order for directed surveillance. Can the minister enlighten me?

Phil Gallie (South of Scotland) (Con): These points are queries. Perhaps the minister could explain what is meant by residential properties. I might be failing to understand, but I think that we could have a situation where an individual was being checked on in a business property.

I would like to know the reasoning behind the amendment. I compared its wording to what was presented to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee. The two paragraphs, (a) and (b), have been reversed, but there does not seem to be a major difference between the wording and effects of the amendments. I do not intend to oppose amendment 25, but I would like the minister to clarify those points.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: As no other member wants to speak, I ask the minister to respond to those points.

Angus MacKay: I will deal with Phil Gallie's point first. The purpose of amendment 25 is to provide that surveillance that involves a device or a person on residential premises or in a private vehicle and that is targeted at someone who is outside the premises or vehicle would be classed as directed rather than intrusive surveillance. The nub of the issue is how we define what constitutes intrusive or directed surveillance. Is it where the surveillance device is located or where the person under surveillance is located? It seems common sense that our starting premise should be the individual's expectation of privacy and what they would think their rights were. If the individual were located within their home, they would have a high expectation of privacy, whereas if they were in a more public space—as I said, degrees of privacy are involved in the invasion of privacy—we feel that what is set out in this amendment would be appropriate.

Phil Gallie: I accept the minister's definitions. However, an individual who was running a small business might be in a private office, which he would feel was a place where he could expect privacy.

Angus MacKay: I was coming to that point. As I said, the bill recognises that there are degrees of invasion of privacy. For that reason, we must consider where an individual could expect to have absolute privacy or near absolute privacy and where he would be operating in a public place. My understanding is that, if an individual were in a place of business, they would expect greater privacy than they would in a public place. For that reason, Mr Gallie's concern about the authorisation would be met by what is proposed in the amendment and by what will be covered in the code of guidance.

Euan Robson also made a point, but I am afraid that I cannot recall what it was. May I invite him to repeat it?

Euan Robson: If a target is moving between premises, is it necessary to apply for the more onerous intrusive surveillance rather than directed surveillance?

Angus MacKay: I recalled the point as Euan started to speak. If the intrusive surveillance target is expected to be mobile or is likely to be mobile, it would be prudent for the relevant public authority to have directed surveillance authorisation as well. I think that that covers Euan Robson's concern.

On Phil Gallie's point, business premises per se would not be within the specific definition relating to intrusive surveillance, but it may be possible to deal with that sort of issue in drawing up the code of guidance, when we examine how forces would be expected to operate in more specifically defined circumstances.

Amendment 25 agreed to.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We now come to amendment 1, which is grouped with amendment 2.

Ben Wallace (North-East Scotland) (Con): In lodging these amendments, I was trying to sum up what the bill is about—it is designed to protect not just the police in the course of their duties, but the public. I am grateful to members of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, who listened to some of my past experiences.

I have tried to clear up the grey area that will result from the bill: when is a source not a source, and when is the use of a covert human intelligence source actually just the use of a regular contact, who volunteers information to the police or develops a relationship with a detective or a member of an agency?

Many covert human intelligence sources derive benefit from their actions. They are either paid or it is perceived that they get some benefit or special treatment from the agencies, which is used to cultivate them so that they carry out directed surveillance or actions. That is why the amendments refer to direction. I want to clear up what is often a difficult problem on the ground.

Notoriously, the relationship between handlers—the people who deal with the sources—and senior officers is often strained. Handlers are secretive about whom they know or develop as sources and they do not like to share that information with senior officers. In my experience, senior officers have mostly shied away from any legislation on this matter; if there has to be legislation, they would like it to be as woolly as possible. However, handlers would like better and more directed legislation, so that they know when they cross the line between having a friendly relationship with someone or leaning on them and making them work for the agency.

The minister will probably say that the term "cultivation" provides a clue to determining whether a source becomes directed and, in effect, comes into the employ of an agency. However, sources are not cultivated overnight. A handler picks a group of people in an area and tries to develop relationships with them all, sometimes over many years. When those relationships come to fruition, it may be that one in 10 of those people can be called on as a source. That is when the cultivation happens.

This is a very grey area, which my amendments would go a long way towards clearing up, so that we can avoid cases like those that have occurred in the past, both in national security and police forces, when handlers have crossed the line and public safety and privacy have been put at risk. The amended section would provide that, if a person came under the direction of an agency or gained benefit, they would in effect be a covert human intelligence source. However, if the person happened to be a good neighbour who had a good relationship with a detective on a regular basis or another member of that agency on an ad hoc basis, that individual would not be a source and there would be no need for a lot of unhelpful paperwork and approvals to allow contact to be made. I know that senior officers will say that they are sure that handlers can make the right judgment, but time after time we have seen that they cannot make that judgment. That is when the public, as well as the handler, lose out.

The best-known case—it would not be covered by this bill, but it involves the same issue of the handling of sources—was that of Brian Nelson in Northern Ireland, in which the handlers were reticent about checking with their senior officers how far they could push their source. The case ended up with public safety being infringed and several people quite rightly going to jail.

I have spoken to many people about this matter. There is a marked difference between the feelings of people on the ground and those of people up top and in the bureaucracies. I am trying to protect everybody on the ground rather than the senior officers, who are probably not in favour of any regulation of the use of covert intrusive surveillance or sources.

I move amendment 1.

Christine Grahame (South of Scotland) (SNP): The amendments are very interesting. It is obvious that Ben Wallace has a great deal of experience. I did not think that someone who said that their neighbour was up to something funny would count as a covert human intelligence source. Section 1(7) defines a covert human intelligence source as a person who

"establishes or maintains a personal relationship or other relationship with another person for the covert purpose"

of facilitating the doing of something as defined. The relationship is established or maintained for a specific purpose. This is not about information that is passed willy-nilly. I would like further information on why Ben Wallace does not think that that definition is tight enough.

09:45

Ben Wallace: The problem is that sources are, by their very nature—the fact that they have a relationship with the person, perhaps a workmate rather than a neighbour, on whom they inform—covert. Section 1(7)(b) says that a person is a covert human intelligence source if the person

"covertly uses such a relationship to obtain information or to provide access to any information".

The relationship—being in business with someone or working with them—is being used. My initial amendment, which was changed slightly by the committee clerks, simply used the word "directed", because using a relationship in a directed manner is key to what I mean when I talk about covert intelligence.

Christine Grahame: The member is making it sound as though obtaining information in such a manner is incidental to the relationship, but the definition relates to relationships that are set up for the purpose of obtaining covert information, so I do not see why we need the amendment.

Ben Wallace rose—

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The member can deal with that point when he winds up.

Gordon Jackson (Glasgow Govan) (Lab): Like Christine Grahame, I believe that the amendment is interesting and I feel that Ben Wallace's experience in these matters is valuable, as it gives us an insight into the problem. I have no idea what the minister will do with the amendment, but I have a question. I can understand that there are people in the grey area whom we would not necessarily want to fall within the terms of the bill, because that would inhibit the work of the security services. However, I would have thought that, in practice, the security services or the police would still use the kind of people whom Ben Wallace is talking about outside the scope of the bill, without feeling the need to bring them within the terms of the bill. My fear is that, if we include this exception in the bill, the authorities could use it to justify not registering people when they should and could contrive situations in which they would say that they were not directing the person or paying them money. They could use the grey area in reverse, so to speak, and get round the provisions of the bill by using Ben Wallace's exception. I am interested to hear whether the member believes that that could be a genuine danger.

Ben Wallace rose—

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Let the minister in, Mr Wallace, and you can deal with those points when you wind up.

Angus MacKay: Let me set out our general position and make it clear from the beginning that we intend to resist the amendments.

Law enforcement agencies regularly rely on information volunteered to them by members of the public with no expectation of reward. In our view, it is important that that useful source of information should not be fettered. It is therefore not our intention that those who carry out such activities, which Christine Grahame described, should fall within the definition of a covert human intelligence source.

As section 1(7) of the bill makes clear, covert human intelligence sources are individuals who establish or maintain a relationship with another person for the covert purpose of obtaining, providing access to or disclosing information obtained as a result of that relationship. Furthermore, under section 1(6), references in the bill to the conduct of a covert human intelligence source are references to public authorities inducing, asking or assisting a person to engage in or to obtain information by means of such conduct. Although amendment 1 seeks to clarify that point, our view is that it would not work, as it refers to persons authorised for using covert human intelligence sources. The bill does not authorise people in that way. Instead, it provides that officers of a particular rank—in the case of the police, we propose that that rank should be superintendent—can authorise the use of a covert human source in specified circumstances.

It is also worth drawing the member's attention to the foreword to the code of practice covering the use of covert human intelligence sources, which states that

"members of the public are encouraged to give information or to provide assistance to the police and other authorities . . . with no expectation of a reward . . . Nothing in the provisions of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Act 2000, nor in this code of practice affects such activity."

Indeed, it could be argued that it is the duty of citizens to come forward with such information on criminal acts.

We ask Mr Wallace not to press amendments 1 and 2 on the grounds that they are not necessary and that amendment 1 is technically deficient. The bill and the code of practice already provide that the actions referred to in the amendments do not fall within the definition of the use of covert human intelligence sources contained within the bill. Although I understand and have some sympathy with what Ben Wallace is trying to achieve, we feel that the bill contains adequate cover.

Phil Gallie: I commend Ben Wallace for lodging these amendments. He is certainly well intentioned and to some degree we ignore his advice at our peril. He has been in the front line and knows what is required.

Ben seeks protection for the source, who is carrying out acts of good citizenship. I am concerned that, under certain circumstances, the source could lay themselves open to civil actions somewhere along the line through becoming involved in this process, even though their actions might not come under the description of "covert" offered by the minister. I will listen to Ben's summing-up on that point and we will try to determine the best interests of the good citizen and society as a whole.

Ben Wallace: Instead of developing a relationship with a source, one can use their geography. For example, if the old lady who lives at number 74 happens to be a good neighbour of someone in number 86 who is known to be a criminal, we do not have to tell the source to develop a relationship with that person for our benefit; we target their situation, so that their information becomes important and directed. We go to number 74 and develop the relationship in that way. As a result, the old lady might not know why we are developing such a relationship. We do not tell the source to look out her front window at her neighbour every day; instead we manipulate the situation by using the source's geography. That point needs clarification.

Gordon Jackson's comments were interesting. In the case of Brian Nelson, where handlers overstepped the mark, a woolly use of the word "direction" was used by the defence during the trial. The handlers said, "We were not directing our informer; he simply happened to tell us what he was doing and that there were bad people in the area, and we were giving him information to help him to get closer to running his sources." They said that they did not tell him to pervert the course of justice or target certain individuals. However, they were found wanting with such a passive defence.

My amendments seek to protect the public as well as the handlers. Intelligence is all about knowing the full picture. Very often the source is the person being manipulated. Sources often do not know what operation they are part of; for example, no one tells them that they are actually informing on their workmate because he is involved in a £2 million fraud. It is the nature of source handling that sources are manipulated as much as anyone else, which sometimes makes the job pretty unpleasant. I am trying to protect the public from such manipulation as well as the handler who sometimes gets it wrong, which is why I will press the amendment to a vote.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The question is, that amendment 1, in the name of Ben Wallace, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

Members: No.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: There will be a division.

FOR

Aitken, Bill (Glasgow) (Con)
Douglas-Hamilton, Lord James (Lothians) (Con)
Fergusson, Alex (South of Scotland) (Con)
Gallie, Phil (South of Scotland) (Con)
Harding, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Johnston, Nick (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Johnstone, Alex (North-East Scotland) (Con)
McGrigor, Mr Jamie (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
McIntosh, Mrs Lyndsay (Central Scotland) (Con)
McLetchie, David (Lothians) (Con)
Mundell, David (South of Scotland) (Con)
Scanlon, Mary (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Scott, John (Ayr) (Con)
Wallace, Ben (North-East Scotland) (Con)

AGAINST

Adam, Brian (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Baillie, Jackie (Dumbarton) (Lab)
Barrie, Scott (Dunfermline West) (Lab)
Boyack, Sarah (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
Brankin, Rhona (Midlothian) (Lab)
Brown, Robert (Glasgow) (LD)
Campbell, Colin (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Chisholm, Malcolm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab)
Craigie, Cathie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab)
Crawford, Bruce (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Curran, Ms Margaret (Glasgow Baillieston) (Lab)
Deacon, Susan (Edinburgh East and Musselburgh) (Lab)
Elder, Dorothy-Grace (Glasgow) (SNP)
Ewing, Dr Winnie (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Ewing, Fergus (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP)
Ewing, Mrs Margaret (Moray) (SNP)
Fabiani, Linda (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Ferguson, Patricia (Glasgow Maryhill) (Lab)
Finnie, Ross (West of Scotland) (LD)
Galbraith, Mr Sam (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)
Gibson, Mr Kenneth (Glasgow) (SNP)
Gillon, Karen (Clydesdale) (Lab)
Godman, Trish (West Renfrewshire) (Lab)
Grahame, Christine (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Grant, Rhoda (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Gray, Iain (Edinburgh Pentlands) (Lab)
Henry, Hugh (Paisley South) (Lab)
Home Robertson, Mr John (East Lothian) (Lab)
Hughes, Janis (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab)
Hyslop, Fiona (Lothians) (SNP)
Ingram, Mr Adam (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Jackson, Dr Sylvia (Stirling) (Lab)
Jackson, Gordon (Glasgow Govan) (Lab)
Jamieson, Cathy (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab)
Jamieson, Margaret (Kilmarnock and Loudoun) (Lab)
Jenkins, Ian (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD)
Kerr, Mr Andy (East Kilbride) (Lab)
Livingstone, Marilyn (Kirkcaldy) (Lab)
Lochhead, Richard (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
MacAskill, Mr Kenny (Lothians) (SNP)
Macdonald, Lewis (Aberdeen Central) (Lab)
MacDonald, Ms Margo (Lothians) (SNP)
Macintosh, Mr Kenneth (Eastwood) (Lab)
MacKay, Angus (Edinburgh South) (Lab)
MacLean, Kate (Dundee West) (Lab)
Macmillan, Maureen (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Martin, Paul (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab)
Matheson, Michael (Central Scotland) (SNP)
McAllion, Mr John (Dundee East) (Lab)
McAveety, Mr Frank (Glasgow Shettleston) (Lab)
McCabe, Mr Tom (Hamilton South) (Lab)
McConnell, Mr Jack (Motherwell and Wishaw) (Lab)
McGugan, Irene (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
McLeish, Henry (Central Fife) (Lab)
McLeod, Fiona (West of Scotland) (SNP)
McMahon, Mr Michael (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab)
McNeil, Mr Duncan (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab)
McNeill, Pauline (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab)
McNulty, Des (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab)
Morgan, Alasdair (Galloway and Upper Nithsdale) (SNP)
Muldoon, Bristow (Livingston) (Lab)
Mulligan, Mrs Mary (Linlithgow) (Lab)
Munro, Mr John (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD)
Murray, Dr Elaine (Dumfries) (Lab)
Oldfather, Irene (Cunninghame South) (Lab)
Paterson, Mr Gil (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Peacock, Peter (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Peattie, Cathy (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Radcliffe, Nora (Gordon) (LD)
Robison, Shona (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Robson, Euan (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD)
Rumbles, Mr Mike (West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine) (LD)
Scott, Tavish (Shetland) (LD)
Simpson, Dr Richard (Ochil) (Lab)
Smith, Elaine (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab)
Smith, Iain (North-East Fife) (LD)
Smith, Margaret (Edinburgh West) (LD)
Stone, Mr Jamie (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
Thomson, Elaine (Aberdeen North) (Lab)
Ullrich, Kay (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Wallace, Mr Jim (Orkney) (LD)
Watson, Mike (Glasgow Cathcart) (Lab)
Welsh, Mr Andrew (Angus) (SNP)
White, Ms Sandra (Glasgow) (SNP)
Whitefield, Karen (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab)
Wilson, Allan (Cunninghame North) (Lab)

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The result of the division is: For 14, Against 86, Abstentions 0.

Amendment 1 disagreed to.

Amendment 2 not moved.

After section 1

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We now come to amendment 27, which is grouped with amendments 28, 29, 67, 69, 71, 73 and 74.

Angus MacKay: These amendments are, unfortunately, rather lengthy, but their purpose is simple: to replace the commissioners who are established under the Police Act 1997 as the mechanism for providing oversight of the use of powers under the bill with an identical system of oversight to be provided by commissioners to be appointed by Scottish ministers.

I make it clear that the Executive is perfectly content with the work done by the Police Act 1997 commissioners. It is important to put on record our thanks to Lords Davidson and Bonomy in particular for their work in relation to operations conducted by the Scottish police forces under the 1997 act.

The amendments are the result of further consideration that the Executive has given to whether it is competent for the Scottish Parliament to confer new functions on a class of bodies known as cross-border public authorities. Those authorities include the surveillance commissioners. Although we believe that it is competent to confer such functions on such bodies, that matter has not been conclusively determined by the courts. We cannot therefore discount the possibility of arguments being raised in the courts on this point. Because of the importance of the functions in question to the regulatory scheme, and because we want to avoid any possibility of arguments being run in the courts on that issue, we think that we should take the opportunity to reconsider the matter at this stage.

We have therefore taken the view that the most prudent step would be to replace the references in the bill to oversight being provided by the surveillance commissioners established by the 1997 act with a system of oversight to be provided by equivalent commissioners to be appointed by Scottish ministers. Our intention is that this should make no difference in practice to the operation of the oversight mechanism. The amendments provide for a chief commissioner, ordinary commissioners, assistant commissioners and for staff to assist the commissioners in their work.

I emphasise the fact that the amendments do not represent any change in policy in the type or level of oversight of the powers in the bill; they represent our determination to ensure that the legislation in this important area is as robust as possible against challenges made in the courts to evidence gathered in accordance with the legislation's provisions.

I move amendment 27.

10:00

Michael Matheson (Central Scotland) (SNP): I take on board the minister's comments, in the sense that the amendments do not make any fundamental changes to the bill, but amendment 27 states that ministers will be responsible for appointing the given number of chief surveillance commissioners or surveillance commissioners. That will not require any form of parliamentary approval. I seek assurance from the minister on the required number of surveillance commissioners and chief surveillance commissioners. I am sure that, from one Government to the next, there may be a difference of opinion on how many such commissioners are needed at any given time.

Amendment 27 requires the removal of a chief surveillance commissioner to be approved by the Scottish Parliament. I welcome that, but I am concerned that subsection (10) of the new section that amendment 27 would insert states that there shall be no appeal mechanism to challenge any decision of a chief surveillance commissioner. I would like the minister to comment on the ECHR implications when someone seeks to challenge the decision of a chief surveillance commissioner, but cannot do so as a result of amendment 27.

Phil Gallie: I have similar comments to those of Michael Matheson on the numbers of chief surveillance commissioners and surveillance commissioners. I accept, or at least presume, that a major part of the change is a result of the implementation of the Scotland Act 1998.

What difference will there be in the number of surveillance commissioners once the Scottish commissioners are in place? Is there a cost complication? Will additional people also be appointed at deputy level, or do the new provisions simply represent a continuation of the work of those people who have already been appointed and have acted under Scots law in the past?

Will there be any implications for cross-border activities and how will the work of the surveillance commissioners in Scotland fit in with work that is going on south of the border? Will there be any erosion of past practice in that area? How do the conditions and requirements in the bill compare with the conditions of appointment that applied to commissioners previously, apart from the fact that Scottish ministers will now make the appointments?

If the minister could address those points, I would be quite happy.

Euan Robson: We are prepared to support this group of amendments, but I want the minister to address similar points to those raised by Michael Matheson and Phil Gallie. In subsection (7) of the new section introduced by amendment 27, there is no reference to the circumstances of bankruptcy or criminal offence on the part of the surveillance commissioner, nor to a commissioner's removal by the Scottish ministers being reported to the Parliament. I presume that the contents of proposed subsection (6) are implied in proposed subsection (7), but I would like clarification from the minister on that.

Amendment 28 deals with assistant surveillance commissioners. Towards the end of that amendment, subsection (5) of the new section that it proposes states:

"Subsections (3) to (8) of section (Surveillance Commissioners) above apply"—

and I reiterate Michael Matheson's point about ECHR compliance—however, proposed subsection (10) under amendment 27 does not appear to apply to assistant surveillance commissioners. Does that imply that there is some appeal mechanism against their decisions?

Angus MacKay: I reiterate that we are not attempting to put in place a different, altered structure to the content of the bill: we are not attempting to change it qualitatively. The purpose of the amendments is simply to ensure that we avoid any challenge in the courts to the propriety of the Parliament appointing the commissioners. It is important to make it clear that the Scottish ministers will appoint commissioners here in Scotland, to ensure that we are not open to challenge at a later date.

It would be difficult to give an undertaking for future Administrations, but I see no reason why we would want to reduce the number of commissioners. The numbers have been in place in previous legislation, for previous matters, for some time. In discussion of the bill, we have debated the way in which we want the oversight of scrutiny to take place, and I recognise no argument for changing that.

Several more specific questions were raised, the first of which concerned the ECHR. We believe that there are no ECHR considerations in respect of this matter, as the commissioners will not determine civil rights. The level of oversight that will be involved will be the same and should be sufficient for the purposes of article 8 of the convention. Existing ECHR cases on this law make the position clear, and we do not think that there will be any change in that position.

We cannot say anything further about future appointments—about the number of commissioners or whatever—beyond the undertaking that I have given. Our intention is to replicate the existing number and structure of the commissioners; that is made clear in the detail of the amendments. Under the previous arrangements, costs were met by Scottish ministers, and we do not envisage any additional costs. The costs are already incurred and in place; it will be simply a matter of allotting them to a different structure. We are absolutely clear that there will be no impact on cross-border operations.

I have just received a note with Mr Robson's name on, to remind me to address his question. I confess that I missed Mr Robson's point, as I was thinking about a point that Mr Gallie raised. I am not suggesting that Mr Robson sent the note—I see a look of confusion on his face—as it came from someone else.

Mr Robson asked me about the applicability of proposed subsection (10) of amendment 27 to assistant commissioners. The role of an assistant commissioner will be only to assist a commissioner in his or her functions. It is therefore not necessary to place the same obligation on the assistant commissioners, as they will carry out only the role of assistants.

I think that that addresses most of the points that were raised. I apologise if I have missed any.

Phil Gallie: I recognise that the bill was rushed through stage 2, but the stage 3 amendments contain a substantial amount of wording. Why did it take so long to lodge the amendments and why did it take so long to recognise their necessity, given that they were not included originally? They constitute a major section.

Angus MacKay: As I said in my opening speech, although there are a lot of words in the amendments, their substance is simple and pithy. They are designed simply to replace the mechanism whereby commissioners are appointed and to allow Scottish ministers to do what would otherwise be done on a UK basis. A lot of words are needed to describe that change, but the substance of the amendments is fairly straightforward.

The purpose of amendment 27 is to ensure a belt-and-braces approach to the issue. The last thing that we want is the possibility of challenges in the courts, in serious circumstances, simply over the technicality of whether it is appropriate for the Scottish Executive to appoint commissioners. We want to ensure that we are not open to that challenge, so that the mechanism can proceed smoothly and law enforcement will not be hindered in any way.

Amendment 27 agreed to.

Amendments 28 and 29 moved—[Angus MacKay]—and agreed to.

Section 2—Lawful surveillance etc

Phil Gallie: Amendment 30 concerns an issue that I raised in the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, as the minister and committee members will recall. The minister wrote helpfully to me about the matter on 31 July. The main reason I have lodged the amendment is to put on record the minister's confirmation of what he said in that letter, covering an element of protection for sources against charges of, for example, civil intrusion. I quote from the letter, although I would like the minister to endorse everything he said in it:

"The cancellation of an authorisation for the use of a human source would not mean that the source was acting unlawfully if he was not told."

I remind the minister that there could be circumstances when an authorisation was cancelled but someone working in the field carried on without knowing of that cancellation and so could face the charge of acting unlawfully. This is about protection for someone acting in good faith.

I move amendment 30.

Christine Grahame: I have some sympathy with Phil Gallie. I have looked at section 16 on cancellations and seek clarification of when exactly an authorisation is cancelled—when the decision is made or when the source is told. I seem to recall that that was to be included in a code of practice but I may be wrong. I cannot see it in the draft codes of practice. Perhaps it would be appropriate to include clarification of exactly when a cancellation is effective.

Angus MacKay: I have some sympathy with the intentions of Phil Gallie's amendment; I have put that on record already. He is right to say that after we discussed a similar amendment at stage 2 I wrote to him about it.

Amendment 30 seems to depend on the source being told of the cancellation of the in writing. That will not always be possible and may be dangerous in many circumstances. Human sources may be operating in difficult situations where the arrival of an official letter could seriously endanger their safety—particularly if the letter was misaddressed to someone on the other side of the street, in the kind of circumstances we discussed with Ben Wallace. The cancellation of an authorisation must mean just that. It would not be right for elements of the authorisation to continue after cancellation. For example, if a human source decided to disappear, for whatever reason—as police informants might well decide to do—the protection provided by Mr Gallie's amendment could continue up until the police had managed to locate the informant and give them written notification.

That is not to say that the police will not seek to ensure that an informant is told of the cancellation as soon as possible. The code of practice sets out that as soon as the cancellation has taken place, the police must seek immediately to inform the informant that the authorisation has been revoked.

Phil Gallie mentioned my July letter, and I am happy to confirm that I stand by the specific statements in that letter. I hope that that provides some comfort to him.

10:15

Ben Wallace: To assist Phil Gallie, and in response to the minister, I must say that I have concerns about sending a letter that says, "Thanks very much for working for us. You are now terminated." Source handling is all about face-to-face meetings. It has been known for sources to receive payment for which they sign a receipt. When a source is terminated, especially if that source has been in a dangerous position, some form of relationship is required, not just a telephone call. Usually, that would be a meeting, at which the person would be told, "Thank you very much. Your services are no longer required. Could you sign to confirm that you have received that information?"

The minister should consider introducing in the guidelines a receipt or certificate to be signed so that there is no doubt. I agree with the minister that a letter cannot be sent. Handling is about meetings and, in those meetings, it would not be hard to introduce some form of receipt system.

Phil Gallie: I acknowledge that the minister's written intimation was carried over from a previous occasion. I started by saying that my objective was to get the minister to put on record that his letter provides the cover that I seek. I believe that the letter does that. I am much comforted by the fact that the Official Report will now record that the letter stands. I therefore seek to withdraw my amendment.

Amendment 30, by agreement, withdrawn.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Amendment 31 is grouped with amendments 33, 35 to 41, 43 to 51, 53, 55, 56, 58, 60, 61, 66, 68 and 72. The minister will move amendment 31 and speak to all the amendments in the group. I remind members that the debate must be concluded one hour and 30 minutes after proceedings began.

Angus MacKay: The amendments seek to delete the National Criminal Intelligence Service from the list of public authorities that can authorise the use of surveillance or human sources under the bill. The reason behind the amendments is identical to the one that I gave in relation to the surveillance commissioners—whether it is competent for the Parliament to confer new functions on a class of bodies known as cross-border public authorities. Those cross-border public authorities include NCIS. Although, as I said earlier, we believe that it is competent to confer such functions on such bodies, the matter has not been determined conclusively by the courts so there is the risk of challenge to the lawfulness of evidence collected in accordance with the provisions of the bill.

In the light of that, we seek to take the prudent step of removing the NCIS from the bill. I am advised that that will make little difference in practice to the NCIS, because it, in the main, is involved in intelligence assessment and analysis, rather than collection. Where the NCIS might require to conduct an operation that would require authorisation under the bill, it would be able to do so by working in co-operation with the relevant Scottish police force, which would be required to seek authorisation under the bill.

If the area of uncertainty is resolved and we take the view, at some future point, that it would be desirable to add the NCIS to the list of bodies that can authorise directed surveillance or the use of human sources, it would be relatively simple and straightforward to do so by means of an order under section 5(4) of the bill. At present, however, we consider it more prudent to remove the NCIS.

I move amendment 31.

Amendment 31 agreed to.

Section 3—Authorisation of directed surveillance

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We move to amendment 10, which is grouped with amendments 11 to 18.

Angus MacKay: The amendments are entirely consequential to the amendments that were made at stage 2. I am advised that, although there is no material difference in law between "believes" and "is satisfied", the effect of the stage 2 amendments is to upset the wording in other provisions of the bill. The intention of the amendments is to ensure consistency throughout the bill, to avoid any attempt in later interpretation to find a difference in intention where different words are used.

Although the consequential amendments are necessary and unavoidable, because of the amendment that was made at stage 2, I should indicate to members that they will result in some particularly inelegant language. Mr Matheson pressed the point at an earlier stage of the bill, so I am happy to lay responsibility for that at his door. In section 10(3)(a), for example, a commissioner will need to be

"satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for being satisfied that the requirements of section 6(2)(a) and (b) above are satisfied".

That is a not bad illustration of the unforeseen consequences of tinkering with the very careful construction of the bill as put together by the parliamentary draftsmen.

I move amendment 10.

Michael Matheson: I warmly welcome the amendments. I must respond to the minister's comments by saying that I was in good company. If my memory serves me correctly, Gordon Jackson supported me in committee in saying that "believes" should be replaced by "is satisfied".

Gordon Jackson: I should make it clear to Michael Matheson that I supported him out of a sense of mischief rather than out of principle. If there is inelegant language, that is where it comes from.

Pauline McNeill (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab): I must respond to Gordon Jackson, because what he has just said is not entirely true. All the Labour members of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee supported Michael Matheson eventually as there was a serious point to be made, although the minister disagreed. That goes to show that committees are effective. Given the civil liberties issues that were raised by the bill, we felt that the wording "is satisfied" would be better than "believes" when it came to granting authorisations. The committee was quite united on that.

Phil Gallie: I feel obliged to say that Conservative members of the committee also supported the amendment in question. I am shocked by Gordon Jackson's levity when dealing with such a serious bill. Conservatives would never think of treating such matters so lightly.

We support the amendments in the minister's name.

Amendment 10 agreed to.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Amendment 3 is grouped with amendment 4. Michael Matheson will move amendment 3 and speak to both amendments.

Michael Matheson: The minister will be aware of the background to the two amendments, as the issues to which they relate were debated at length in the Justice and Home Affairs Committee. There is concern about the section in the bill that amendments 3 and 4 seek to change. They would remove a catch-all provision that will allow ministers to make authorisations for direct surveillance on a range of issues. In evidence to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, organisations such as the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland were unable to define why that power was required and for what reasons it might be used. When the minister defended his position before the committee, he was somewhat unconvincing in explaining why an all-encompassing provision was required. The bill as it stands defines the grounds for authorisation of direct surveillance. I do not believe that the general power with which the minister would be provided is either desirable or healthy in a modern democracy. I hope that for that reason the minister will see fit to accept the amendments second time round, to ensure that ministers are not provided with wide-ranging powers that they have so far been unable to justify in debate.

I move amendment 3.

Phil Gallie: Michael Matheson used the term "catch-all provision", and he was absolutely right to do so. However, I would tend to use the word "flexibility". It is important that there should be a degree of flexibility in the bill.

I joked with Gordon Jackson a moment ago but, in all seriousness, the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Bill is needed to prevent hard-line criminals from abusing society. Circumstances, albeit difficult to define, could arise where urgent attention is needed. In the interests of society and democracy, it is right to give ministers that discretion.

I have not always got the greatest of confidence in the present bunch of ministers. However, they have been elected to a position of trust to look after the interests of society as a whole. On that basis, it seems reasonable to include flexible provision in the bill. Provided that the minister does not accept the amendment, we will support his position.

Gordon Jackson: I hope that the minister will accept the amendment, because on this occasion Michael Matheson is right and Phil Gallie is wrong. I agree that the provision raises a serious issue; it is one of the few matters that gave the committee real concern. The idea that the Executive should have such a catch-all provision did not appeal to members, even though it was made clear that it would be used only by positive resolution of the Parliament.

Phil Gallie's point about the "present bunch" of ministers is a fair approach. In future, there will be other bunches of ministers of various persuasions and this is a long-term provision. The idea that we would give a long-term power to any Executive to use such a catch-all provision was extremely worrying. I would have supported Phil Gallie on the question of flexibility if anyone could have provided one good reason why such flexibility was needed. I mean Angus MacKay no disrespect, and he will probably agree that although he tried to provide such a reason, it was not the most convincing argument that the committee heard. I see that he is raising his hands in acknowledgement.

When the committee sought to find out when the provision would be used, the examples that we were given made us more worried about the provision rather than putting our minds at rest. Eventually, most members concluded that the right course of action was to remove the provision. If, in future, something develops for which we need a further authorisation reason, no doubt the Parliament could act quickly to deal with it. I prefer to take that risk rather than to let the provision stand, because it would be so open to abuse—not by the present bunch, of course—that I do not want it to be included in the bill. I hope that the minister will accept Michael Matheson's amendment.

Euan Robson: Like Gordon Jackson, I hope that the minister will at least enlighten us as to why the provision is necessary. It is difficult to understand why a power should be granted without an example of the circumstances in which that power might be exercised. However, there is a fine balance to be struck. The minister said that such orders would be made through an affirmative procedure and that is a significant concession. If the minister could convince us that there are circumstances where the provision in question might be used, I would be prepared to reject the amendment. However, if no one can give any reason why the provision should be included in the bill, it would not be appropriate to grant such a power.

Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh (Central Scotland) (Con): This is the minister's last opportunity to come up with an example. He has had a long time to find such an example. Let us hear it.

Ben Wallace: I, too, support Michael Matheson on this point. I cannot think of any example where section 3(3)(d) would be appropriate, even given the markedly complicated interfaces between the police and other agencies. I urge the minister to accept the amendment.

10:30

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Mr Wallace will respond to groups 7, 8, 9 and 17.

The Deputy First Minister and Minister for Justice (Mr Jim Wallace): I welcome the exchange of views that we have had today, which follows on from an intense debate in committee on an important issue. Giving ministers powers in such an area is not something that the Parliament should do lightly.

After taking into account the range of views that have been expressed across the Parliament and having given further careful consideration to the matter, I can inform the Parliament that the Executive is prepared to agree to the amendments in groups 7, 8, 9 and 17. There are arguments about flexibility, as Mr Gallie mentioned, but there would have been no intention to use the power in the foreseeable future. Removing the power from the bill, therefore, should not cause any immediate difficulty.

It remains the case that it is impossible to predict what the future will bring. As Gordon Jackson said, this is a long-term provision. It may be that through some of the human rights jurisprudence that is emerging in the courts, there will be a need at some point in the future to add to the purposes that are already set out in the bill. We accept, however, that in such circumstances we would be obliged to return to the Parliament with a short bill—primary legislation—to do so. I apologise prospectively to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee for overloading it, should that happen.

Phil Gallie: Could the minister describe the status quo of the UK legislation?

Mr Wallace: The UK legislation contains the provision that we are agreeing to eliminate, so there will be divergence between the Scottish and UK legislation. I understand that the Subordinate Legislation Committee reflected on that issue and on section 5(3), which gives ministers powers to add or remove relevant public authorities for the purposes of sections 3 and 4—that is, for the authorisation of directed surveillance or covert human intelligence sources. That power is subject to affirmative resolution, so Parliament would have to approve the resolution before any group could be added.

It is interesting to note that, despite there being the best will in the world when the legislation was drafted, the Home Office has already been advised that the Financial Services Authority should be added to the list of bodies that can carry out surveillance. It is likely, therefore, that the Home Secretary will seek to add to the purposes by means of a power that is equivalent to that which we are debating. We would not seek to do that here because the functions of the FSA are reserved, but it is interesting to note how soon after the Westminster legislation hit the statute book that one overlooked authority has emerged. With regard to that particular power—not the one that is the subject of Mr Matheson's amendments 3 and 4—that flexibility has already had to be activated. However, for the reasons that I have outlined, it is the Executive's intention to agree to Mr Matheson's amendments.

Michael Matheson: I thank the minister, and congratulate him on showing such humility in accepting the amendments and denying himself such wide-ranging powers. The purpose of the bill is to strike a balance between the need to undertake surveillance and the protection of individuals' civil liberties. By removing section 3(3)(d) we will maintain balance and ensure that the civil liberties of individuals in Scotland are upheld. I welcome particularly the fact that—given that the amendments were lodged by the SNP—our legislation will be altered so that the powers that will be available will be different from those that are available under the Westminster act. On that basis, once the bill is passed I believe that our act will be better than theirs.

Phil Gallie: Given what has been said, I repeat that we are changing the status quo. I go along with the judgments of the ministers, but remind them that when it came to the serious situation that developed regarding the Ruddle bill, it took time to get that legislation through Parliament. In the kind of circumstances that I have in mind, it might be that that time would not be available to those on the ground who wanted to carry out a particular surveillance exercise.

That said, the Conservatives will not oppose the amendments that have been lodged by Michael Matheson and Christine Grahame.

Amendment 3 agreed to.

Section 4—Authorisation of covert human intelligence sources

Amendment 4 moved—[Michael Matheson]—and agreed to.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We come now to amendment 32, which is on its own.

Phil Gallie: The amendment, which was submitted to me by the Law Society of Scotland, seeks to protect the source of information. It would ensure that before authorisation is granted, the person who considers the application must be satisfied that arrangements have been put in place to protect the source in the event of cancellation of the authorisation.

It is essential at the time of granting an authorisation that measures are put in place to protect the source not only during the course of the authorisation but on its cancellation and immediately thereafter. The security and welfare of the source should be protected at all times. That is why the amendment has been lodged.

I move amendment 32.

Ben Wallace: I speak in support of amendment 32. When a source is taken on, not only should the individual be taken on but the risks run by the source should be taken on. The amendment goes a good way towards ensuring that that problem is well thought through before a source is authorised. I urge the minister to agree to the amendment.

Mr Jim Wallace: I have heard Mr Gallie and Mr Wallace and have considerable sympathy with the sentiments that underlie the amendment. We would all agree that it is important to ensure the security and welfare of a covert human intelligence source. Sources should be protected even after they have ceased operating as such.

We have considered the matter since it was raised at stage 2, but it is considered more appropriate that such provisions should be covered in the code of practice for the use of covert human intelligence sources rather than be included on the face of the bill.

I draw members' attention to sections 3 and 4 of the code, which is available on the Scottish Executive website. The sections contain a number of measures that relate to the security and welfare of covert human intelligence sources. For example, they ensure that sources should have designated handlers and controllers and that

"a risk assessment is carried out to determine the risk to the source of any tasking".

The code goes on to state that

"the ongoing security and welfare of the source after the cancellation of their role should . . . be considered at the outset."

Security of a source is not an afterthought; that must be provided from the outset.

Mr Gallie might like to note that section 3.37 of the code, which relates to the cancellation of authorisations, includes a further stipulation that

"the safety and welfare of the source following cancellation should continue to be assured."

Those points are very much to the fore in our considerations and in the considerations of those who use covert human intelligence sources. The question is not, therefore, being ignored; rather it has been judged that the matter will be better dealt with in the code than it would be by inclusion in the face of the bill.

As Angus MacKay indicated, a similar amendment was debated at stage 2. There is a problem with the amendment, as it refers to

"the person authorising the conduct"

as being the individual with responsibility for reviewing the continuing security and welfare of the source once the initial authorisation has been cancelled. It will sometimes be the case that it is necessary to continue to offer protection and security to a source for many years after their use has ended. It is inevitable that in some situations the person who authorises the source's conduct will have changed jobs or retired during the period between authorisation and cancellation. If the amendment were agreed to, it would be unclear in those circumstances upon whom the duty that is provided for would fall. However, there is no doubt in the code of practice that that is a continuing responsibility of those who have used or are using covert intelligence sources.

I hope that, in the light of that explanation of where we consider the issue to be best dealt with, Mr Gallie will be prepared to withdraw his amendment.

Phil Gallie: I am grateful to the minister for his comments and for putting the codes of practice on record. Codes of practice can change over the years, but as the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Bill passes through Parliament today, the comments that are made are recorded in the Official Report. They become part of the philosophy behind the bill and will be examined should matters go to court in future.

The minister's words more than covered the issues that I aimed at. On that basis, I am happy to seek to withdraw my amendment.

Amendment 32, by agreement, withdrawn.

Section 5—Persons entitled to grant authorisations under sections 3 and 4

Amendment 33 moved—[Mr Jim Wallace]—and agreed to.

After section 5

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We now come to amendment 34, which is grouped with amendments 42, 52, 54 and 57. The minister will move amendment 34 and speak to the other amendments in the group.

Mr Jim Wallace: The purpose of amendment 34, and of the amendments that are grouped with it, is to ensure that the bill covers the activities of the Scottish Crime Squad. I should explain that, from the outset, the Executive has been aware of the need for the bill to cover the Scottish Crime Squad. However, questions were raised about how that could be done best, given that the Scottish Crime Squad is not established by statute, but by collaborative agreement under section 12 of the Police (Scotland) Act 1967. Those questions have been resolved and that resolution is reflected in this group of amendments.

Amendment 34 provides for officers of the Scottish Crime Squad to authorise directed surveillance and the conduct and use of covert human intelligence sources. It also provides that the Scottish Crime Squad will be able to use intrusive surveillance by applying to the chief constable of the relevant police force for the area in which that intrusive surveillance will take place.

It is intended that the Scottish Crime Squad will become the operational arm of the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency and so will fall within the category that is provided for in amendment 34, which provides for that development to take place.

I hope—indeed, I am sure—that members will agree that the work that is undertaken by specialist teams in combating drug trafficking and other serious crime in Scotland is very valuable. We recognise the need to ensure that the legislative framework is in place to enable such teams to function efficiently.

I move amendment 34.

Michael Matheson: I take on board the minister's comments, although I confess that when I saw amendment 34 I was somewhat surprised that it should have been lodged at such a late stage, given the level of debate that has taken place. I do not know whether the lodging of the amendment was a result of the way in which the legislation has had to be rushed through Parliament. Will the minister indicate why it was lodged at stage 3, given the consideration of the bill that was undertaken at stage 2?

Mr Jim Wallace: As I indicated, we knew from the outset that the Scottish Crime Squad had to be covered by the bill and that there was a conceptual difficulty because that body was not established by statute. It was not easy for the draftsmen to take that off the shelf, as it were, and slot it neatly into the bill. One could not say, "The Scottish Crime Squad, as defined in section whatever of the Police (Scotland) Act 1967", because that squad was constituted by way of a collaborative arrangement.

This provision is necessary and must be in place by 2 October—amendment 34 is a result of the fact that we knew from the outset that the position of the Scottish Crime Squad had to be ironed out. We have managed to work out the way in which the amendment can be slotted into the bill properly to ensure that such important work is covered.

Dennis Canavan (Falkirk West): Can the minister advise members how many officers serve in the Scottish Crime Squad?

Mr Jim Wallace: No—I am sorry that I cannot do so off the top of my head. However, I am sure that I will be able to give Mr Canavan that information before the end of the debate.

Ben Wallace: On three occasions, I raised my concern about where the Drug Enforcement Agency was covered in the bill and was given assurances that the agency was catered for. However, these substantial amendments have been lodged at the last minute. I ask the Deputy First Minister to expand on that.

Mr Jim Wallace: I have little to add to my comments. The Scottish Crime Squad will be the operational arm of the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency. The provisions that the amendments seek to insert in the bill will create the legislative framework in which the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency and the Scottish Crime Squad, acting as the agency's operational arm, will be able to carry out important modes of inquiry.

10:45

There is a distinction between the three categories. Intrusive surveillance, which is the most intrusive category, would require authorisation by the chief constable of the area. Directed surveillance and the conduct and use of human intelligence sources would be overseen by senior officers of the Scottish Crime Squad. As I said, the Scottish Crime Squad does not have a statutory basis and requires collaboration between police forces in Scotland. That is why it has been important to work out the proper statutory way in which its activities can be covered.

In response to Mr Canavan's question, I can now inform him that there are more than 100 officers in the Scottish Crime Squad.

Amendment 34 agreed to.

Section 6—Authorisation of intrusive surveillance

Amendments 35 and 36 moved—[Mr Jim Wallace]—and agreed to.

Section 7—Rules for grant of authorisations

Amendments 37 to 44 moved—[Mr Jim Wallace]—and agreed to.

Section 8—Grant of authorisations in cases of urgency

Amendments 45 to 51 moved—[Mr Jim Wallace]—and agreed to.

Section 9—Notification of authorisations for intrusive surveillance

Amendment 11 moved—[Mr Jim Wallace]—and agreed to.

Section 10—Approval required for authorisations to take effect

Amendment 12 moved—[Mr Jim Wallace]—and agreed to.

Amendments 52 to 54 moved—[Mr Jim Wallace]—and agreed to.

Section 11—Quashing of authorisations etc

Amendments 13 to 16 moved—[Mr Jim Wallace]—and agreed to.

Section 12—Appeals against decisions by Surveillance Commissioners

Amendments 55 and 56 moved—[Mr Jim Wallace]—and agreed to.

Amendments 17 and 18 moved—[Mr Jim Wallace]—and agreed to.

Section 14—Information to be provided to Surveillance Commissioners

Amendments 57 and 58 moved—[Mr Jim Wallace]—and agreed to.

Section 15—General rules about grant, renewal and duration

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We now come to amendment 59, which stands on its own. Phil Gallie will speak to and move amendment 59.

Phil Gallie: We were on a nice run. I would be very happy if we just said, "Agreed" and carried on.

Amendment 59 refers to the general rules about grant, renewal and duration of authorisations. It has been drawn to my attention by the Law Society of Scotland. To a degree it is a dotting the i's and crossing the t's amendment. It insists that all authorisations must be signed and dated and that the designation of the person who is signing is applied to the authorisation.

The Law Society of Scotland is of the view that authorisations must be in writing, subscribed and dated. It is also essential that the capacity in which the granter is acting is specified on the authorisation. The aim is to enable those who act on the authorisation to ascertain whether the authorisation is ex facie valid. Those conditions apply currently to the granting of common law search warrants in Scotland and should therefore be extended to the granting of authorisations in this matter.

It seems to be a minor but authentic point, which I ask the minister to take on board.

I move amendment 59.

Michael Matheson: I have some sympathy with Phil Gallie's amendment, because it is similar to the amendment that I lodged at the Justice and Home Affairs Committee during stage 2.

I would like reassurance from the minister, because I recall that he stated at stage 2 that the provision to which he referred would be made under the codes of practice. I will be grateful if he will confirm that that will be the case.

Angus MacKay: I know that extensive amendment swapping in one shape or form has taken place between Mr Gallie and Mr Matheson in regard to different parts of the bill.

I am aware of the arguments that were put forward at stage 2 that the authorisation process under the bill should be brought into line with authorisation for search warrants. However, there is an important difference between the two situations. The information on a search warrant exists for a specific reason—so that it can be scrutinised by the owner or resident of the property that is to be searched. It is clearly important in such circumstances that the person understands who has authorised the search warrant.

The situation regarding an authorisation under the bill is different. This has been the subject of extensive debate during consideration of other sections. It is clear that, for very good reasons, most subjects of surveillance will not be aware that they are under observation. There is not, therefore, the same requirement for an authorisation to be presented to and readily understood by the subject of that authorisation—it would be incredible if it was. I cannot envisage the circumstances in which undercover officers or agents would run up to surveillance targets to show them the authorisation to survey them covertly.

However, that is not to say that there is any intention under the bill to hide the identities of authorising officers. The bill specifies that that and any other information must be provided to the surveillance commissioners, to enable them to carry out their duties. The Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 also provides that it shall be the duty of specified persons, including all police forces, to disclose or provide to the tribunal all such documents and information that the tribunal may require to exercise its jurisdiction, which is pretty all-encompassing. As members know, that will include cases brought by the public under the bill.

As I said at stage 2, the contents of notifications of authorisations for intrusive surveillance will be set out in a Scottish statutory instrument—I think that that answers Mr Matheson's point—to be laid before the Parliament after the bill receives royal assent, while authorisations for directed surveillance and the use of covert human sources will, in practice, contain the name and rank of the authorising officer.

I therefore ask Mr Gallie to withdraw amendment 59.

Phil Gallie: I thank the minister for that. I do not understand why we need a statutory instrument to address this issue. I recognise that the person who is under surveillance will not be aware of that fact, but we could be talking about a chain of individuals involved in the surveillance activities.

Basically, it is a protection—under civil law perhaps—that people carrying out their job should be fully aware of the terms under which they are working. That is why the Law Society suggested this amendment. I still have some sympathy with that view. If the minister will address the issue by statutory instrument, I suppose that, somewhere along the line, all our objectives will have been met. I seek leave to withdraw the amendment.

Amendment 59, by agreement, withdrawn.

Section 16—Cancellations of authorisations

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We move now to amendment 19, on authorisation for cancellation by deputy.

Angus MacKay: Amendment 19 is a tidying-up amendment. Section 16(3) provides that an authorising officer's deputy is under an obligation to cancel an authorisation for surveillance if he or she believes that the authorisation no longer satisfies the requirements of the bill. At present, the section does not qualify that obligation by indicating that the necessity to cancel arises only in the absence of the deputy's superior who granted or renewed the authorisation. The purpose of the amendment is to qualify the obligation.

I move amendment 19.

Amendment 19 agreed to.

Amendments 60 and 61 moved—[Angus MacKay]—and agreed to.

Section 17—Functions of Chief Surveillance Commissioner

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We now come to amendment 20, which is grouped with amendments 62, 21, 65 and 70.

Angus MacKay: This is a group of technical amendments to the provisions that relate to the tribunal that was established by the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000, which that act specifies will be the forum for complaints arising from authorisations under the bill. As with the commissioners and the National Criminal Intelligence Service, for the avoidance of doubt we seek to make it clear that we are not seeking in the bill to confer functions on the tribunal.

Amendment 62 makes it clear that the bill does not seek to specify what assistance the tribunal may require of the commissioner. Amendment 65 aims to remove any doubt that the right to complain to the tribunal is conferred by the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000, rather than by this bill. Amendment 70 makes it clear that the bill does not require the tribunal to take account of the codes of practice.

The other two amendments in this group, amendments 20 and 21, insert a missing "the" into the text, and correct the numerical reference to the section of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 that deals with the tribunal. I move amendment 20.

Michael Matheson: I will speak to amendment 62. I understand what the minister said about these being technical amendments. However, I see that the amendment would introduce a change to the terminology in relation to how the chief surveillance commissioner will give information to the tribunal. As it stands, section 17 states that the chief surveillance commissioner shall give information to the tribunal

"as the Tribunal may require."

The amended section would state that the chief surveillance commissioner shall provide such information as "is appropriate".

I could envisage a situation in which one chief surveillance commissioner thought that certain information was appropriate to pass to the tribunal and another thought that it was not. I am concerned about whether guidance will be issued to chief surveillance commissioners or whether guidance on what should be considered appropriate will be included in the codes of practice, so that there is consistency in what chief surveillance commissioners think is appropriate for the tribunal process. Does the minister think that the amendment could impede the role of the tribunal if there is no guidance in the codes of practice or elsewhere?

Christine Grahame: It seems that there has been a shift in the balance of power. As section 17 stands, the tribunal determines what it may require. Under amendment 62, which is more than technical, it is the chief surveillance commissioner who decides what is appropriate.

11:00

Angus MacKay: Michael Matheson and Christine Grahame raised one or two issues there. The debate about whether the terminology should be "may" or "is appropriate" is interesting, because neither is a terribly precise form of language. "May" is an enabling term, whereas "is appropriate" is perhaps more a term of judgment.

I appreciate the point that Michael Matheson seeks to make, but the Executive is not persuaded that the amendment would make a material difference to the way in which the tribunal operates or that it would hamper the tribunal's capacity to fulfil its purpose. I am happy to consider the possibility of addressing the issue in part when we consider the code of practice and any final guidance to be issued. I can give that undertaking, but I cannot at this stage give an undertaking that we will bring forward anything specific or concrete. However, I will ensure that we approach the matter with an open mind.

Amendment 20 agreed to.

Amendment 62 moved—[Angus MacKay].

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The question is, that amendment 62 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

Members: No.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: There will be a division.

FOR

Aitken, Bill (Glasgow) (Con)
Baillie, Jackie (Dumbarton) (Lab)
Barrie, Scott (Dunfermline West) (Lab)
Boyack, Sarah (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
Brankin, Rhona (Midlothian) (Lab)
Brown, Robert (Glasgow) (LD)
Chisholm, Malcolm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab)
Craigie, Cathie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab)
Curran, Ms Margaret (Glasgow Baillieston) (Lab)
Douglas-Hamilton, Lord James (Lothians) (Con)
Eadie, Helen (Dunfermline East) (Lab)
Ferguson, Patricia (Glasgow Maryhill) (Lab)
Finnie, Ross (West of Scotland) (LD)
Galbraith, Mr Sam (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)
Gillon, Karen (Clydesdale) (Lab)
Godman, Trish (West Renfrewshire) (Lab)
Goldie, Miss Annabel (West of Scotland) (Con)
Gorrie, Donald (Central Scotland) (LD)
Grant, Rhoda (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Gray, Iain (Edinburgh Pentlands) (Lab)
Harding, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Henry, Hugh (Paisley South) (Lab)
Home Robertson, Mr John (East Lothian) (Lab)
Hughes, Janis (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab)
Jackson, Dr Sylvia (Stirling) (Lab)
Jackson, Gordon (Glasgow Govan) (Lab)
Jamieson, Cathy (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab)
Jamieson, Margaret (Kilmarnock and Loudoun) (Lab)
Jenkins, Ian (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD)
Johnston, Nick (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Johnstone, Alex (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Kerr, Mr Andy (East Kilbride) (Lab)
Livingstone, Marilyn (Kirkcaldy) (Lab)
Lyon, George (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
Macdonald, Lewis (Aberdeen Central) (Lab)
Macintosh, Mr Kenneth (Eastwood) (Lab)
MacKay, Angus (Edinburgh South) (Lab)
MacLean, Kate (Dundee West) (Lab)
Macmillan, Maureen (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Martin, Paul (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab)
McAllion, Mr John (Dundee East) (Lab)
McAveety, Mr Frank (Glasgow Shettleston) (Lab)
McCabe, Mr Tom (Hamilton South) (Lab)
McConnell, Mr Jack (Motherwell and Wishaw) (Lab)
McGrigor, Mr Jamie (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
McIntosh, Mrs Lyndsay (Central Scotland) (Con)
McLeish, Henry (Central Fife) (Lab)
McMahon, Mr Michael (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab)
McNeil, Mr Duncan (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab)
McNeill, Pauline (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab)
McNulty, Des (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab)
Monteith, Mr Brian (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Morrison, Mr Alasdair (Western Isles) (Lab)
Muldoon, Bristow (Livingston) (Lab)
Mulligan, Mrs Mary (Linlithgow) (Lab)
Munro, Mr John (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD)
Murray, Dr Elaine (Dumfries) (Lab)
Oldfather, Irene (Cunninghame South) (Lab)
Peacock, Peter (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Peattie, Cathy (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Radcliffe, Nora (Gordon) (LD)
Robson, Euan (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD)
Rumbles, Mr Mike (West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine) (LD)
Scanlon, Mary (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Scott, John (Ayr) (Con)
Scott, Tavish (Shetland) (LD)
Simpson, Dr Richard (Ochil) (Lab)
Smith, Elaine (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab)
Smith, Iain (North-East Fife) (LD)
Smith, Margaret (Edinburgh West) (LD)
Stone, Mr Jamie (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
Thomson, Elaine (Aberdeen North) (Lab)
Wallace, Ben (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Wallace, Mr Jim (Orkney) (LD)
Whitefield, Karen (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab)
Wilson, Allan (Cunninghame North) (Lab)

AGAINST

Adam, Brian (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Campbell, Colin (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Canavan, Dennis (Falkirk West)
Crawford, Bruce (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Cunningham, Roseanna (Perth) (SNP)
Elder, Dorothy-Grace (Glasgow) (SNP)
Ewing, Dr Winnie (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Ewing, Fergus (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP)
Ewing, Mrs Margaret (Moray) (SNP)
Fabiani, Linda (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Gibson, Mr Kenneth (Glasgow) (SNP)
Grahame, Christine (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Hyslop, Fiona (Lothians) (SNP)
Ingram, Mr Adam (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Lochhead, Richard (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
MacAskill, Mr Kenny (Lothians) (SNP)
MacDonald, Ms Margo (Lothians) (SNP)
Matheson, Michael (Central Scotland) (SNP)
McGugan, Irene (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
McLeod, Fiona (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Morgan, Alasdair (Galloway and Upper Nithsdale) (SNP)
Paterson, Mr Gil (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Quinan, Mr Lloyd (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Robison, Shona (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Ullrich, Kay (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Welsh, Mr Andrew (Angus) (SNP)
White, Ms Sandra (Glasgow) (SNP)
Wilson, Andrew (Central Scotland) (SNP)

ABSTENTIONS

Gallie, Phil (South of Scotland) (Con)

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The result of the division is: For 76, Against 28, Abstentions 1.

Amendment 62 agreed to.

Section 18—Co-operation with and reports by Commissioner

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We move to amendment 63, which is grouped with amendment 64. I invite Angus MacKay to move amendment 63 and speak to both amendments.

Angus MacKay: Section 18(3) provides that the chief surveillance commissioner will make an annual report to Scottish ministers on the discharge of any functions under the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Act. The bill is currently worded so that this report should be produced

"As soon as is practicable after the end of each calendar year."

At present, the chief surveillance commissioner writes his report on part III of the Police Act 1997 at the end of the financial year, and the intention is that his or her report on the UK Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 will also be produced at that time of the year. It makes sense for the chief surveillance commissioner's report on the discharge of functions under the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Act to be produced at the same time as reports by the commissioner under the 1997 act, because the same person might well hold the post under the two acts.

The chief surveillance commissioner under the 1997 act has requested that the bill might be amended to make that possible. As a result, this amendment is designed to meet his request and is relatively straightforward, although I am looking somewhat nervously at Michael Matheson as I say that.

I move amendment 63.

Amendment 63 agreed to.

Amendment 64 moved—[Angus MacKay]—and agreed to.

After section 18

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We now come to amendment 8, which is grouped with amendments 8A, 8B and 9. I ask Christine Grahame to move amendment 8 and to speak to all the amendments in the group.

Christine Grahame: I hope that members will bear with me, as I have a lot to say about this amendment. I have battled long and hard and have gone through many hoops for Angus MacKay. I should at least get brownie points for persistence. I think that this is my third draft and, like Topsy, it has growed and growed. It has done so, however, in response to matters of concern that the minister raised about the main point of my amendment.

I should make it plain from the start that my amendment does not give carte blanche to inform all and sundry who have been under surveillance that such surveillance has happened. Although I will see what Phil Gallie has to say about his amendments, I think that they are in the same spirit of mischief that he deplored in Gordon Jackson earlier. I have a feeling that Phil is not going to vote for my amendment anyway.

Members should bear with me as this is a long and complex amendment about civil liberties, which is a very serious matter. I will go through the amendment in some detail, as I know that members are all very busy people and will not have had the time to consider its various parts.

Subsection (1) of the amendment makes it mandatory to inform surveillance subjects. Perhaps members think that that will happen once a certificate has been quashed, ceases to have effect or is cancelled. Indeed, alarm bells might be ringing that all and sundry will be told. However, that is not the case. Subsection (3) of the amendment lists a whole lot of safeguards, including, in subsection (3)(d), the much-maligned catch-all safeguards that we have just got rid of in an earlier section.

Let us examine subsection (3). The recommendation to inform a former surveillance subject that surveillance has ended would not be given if it carried

"a significant risk of prejudice to any ongoing or future operation;"

if it carried

"a significant risk of compromise to the techniques used in ongoing or future operations, or the general capabilities of the police or the National Criminal Intelligence Service to carry out such operations;"

if it carried

"a significant risk to the personal safety of—
(i) any person authorised to carry out surveillance;
(ii) any covert human intelligence . . .; or
(iii) any person from whom information is obtained or access to information gained by such a source;"

which might be the casual person to whom Ben Wallace referred; or the catch-all: if it did not pass

"any further test set out in regulations made by the Scottish Ministers."

That leaves the matter subject to positive affirmation by this Parliament.

Angus MacKay should be fair. I have tried to do everything in this amendment to build in protection for surveillance systems. However, I still think that there is room in this legislation to tell the wholly innocent party about surveillance.

Subsection (4) builds in a timetable for informing the person, which might not be of such significance. Subsection (5) introduces a method of informing a person that they have been under surveillance, and members will see that it is fairly restrictive. When it has been decided that a person ought to be told that they have been under surveillance because there was no reason for them to be under it, they are told

"(a) the period within which the authorisation had effect; and
(b) whether the authorisation was for intrusive surveillance, directed surveillance, or the use of a covert human intelligence source."

That is all that the person will be told.

Subsection (6) says that:

"It shall be the duty of any relevant public authority . . . to provide an ordinary Surveillance Commissioner"

with any information that he or she requires.

My amendment contains many safeguards to ensure that when the commissioner makes up his mind about whether to advise the party that they have been under surveillance, he must be fully informed of all the facts. He would be able to postpone the decision for a six-month deferment period to ensure that he is able to take his time about the decision. Those safeguards are built in to provide protection for the state and the rights of the community as opposed to the rights of the individual.

Subsection (8) provides regulations on which amendment 9 is consequential.

In all the circumstances that I can foresee in practice, my amendment would apply only to a few subjects of surveillance when the authorisation had come to an end. Because of the protective subsections (3)(a) and (3)(b), the amendment would not apply to known felons and drug dealers even if the instance of surveillance—over however long a period—had delivered nothing. It would also not apply to the innocent friend of a known dealer who had been put under surveillance and been found to be unaware of their friend's nefarious activities. Again, that would be because of the protection of subsection (3), with its references to situations such as

"any ongoing or future operation".

However, the amendment would apply to the person who has been wrongly placed under surveillance but who has no connection with wrongdoers. Even then, though, the tests under subsection 3 would apply.

It was interesting to see Jim Wallace rise to speak instead of Ben Wallace when the name "Mr Wallace" was called out. As the bill stands, if a similar cock-up occurred during a surveillance operation and a person with the same name as a suspect was targeted, that person would not be told that they had been under surveillance.

I do not know how much more I can do to accommodate the deputy minister's concern. In that case, why am I bothering? Simply, because it is plainly right for the state, if it has erred and infringed an individual's liberties and privacy, to tell that person what has happened. In support of that view, I enlist the aid of Gordon Jackson's comments in the stage 1 debate. I am not quoting him, but he will agree that he said that if something is right, it is plainly right to do it.

The other reason that I am bothering is that I believe that the bill, unless amended, could be challenged under the European convention on human rights. Article 8 states:

"1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home and his correspondence.

2. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others."

The key part in all of that is the word "necessary".

Subsection (2) of article 10, which deals with the exercise of freedom of expression, states:

"The exercise of these freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime".

Again, the test of what is necessary is important.

Professor Alan Miller of the Scottish Human Rights Centre said, in Holyrood magazine of 24 April 2000, that this bill is, in effect, the Scottish part of the UK Regulation of Investigatory Powers Bill that is currently proceeding through the House of Commons and attracting significant criticism regarding ECHR compatibility from within the legal profession and from human rights non-governmental organisations.

Giving evidence to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, Professor Miller said:

"On the one hand, I do not think that the draft bill deserves excessive criticism."

I agree with that. He continued:

"It should be welcomed. Its stated aim is to provide a legal framework for police surveillance to attempt to achieve ECHR compatibility, so it will be an improvement on the present situation. I think that that is recognised by everyone. The draft bill tries to find a fair balance between individual privacy rights and the public interest.

On the other hand, we all know that, to all intents and purposes, this is a UK bill. We should be aware that the UK has a poor record on the issue of surveillance and ECHR compatibility. Members should also be aware that the ECHR is really only a safety net; it is the lowest common denominator among the states of the Council of Europe . . . Therefore, a certain amount of vigilance is required over the bill."—[Official Report, Justice and Home Affairs Committee, 10 May 2000; c 1208-09.]

11:15

The Law Society of Scotland has stated its concerns. A Law Society witness told the Justice and Home Affairs Committee:

"However, the right of privacy exists under the convention and if that right is invaded, there has been a violation . . . When that law comes"— he was referring to the RIP bill—

"there will be a need for some analogue of the regulation of investigative powers legislation in order to cope with private investigations into fraud or whatever."—[Official Report, Justice and Home Affairs Committee, 15 May 2000; c 1247.]

I also quote Gordon Jackson, speaking during the stage 2 debate—this is his starring role. I warned him of this, as it was only fair. I have not been cruelly selective; I think that this gives a fair flavour. I do not think that everybody wants to hear everything that he said, but I quote him from the Official Report of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee's meeting of 4 July.

"The bottom line is that there will be occasions where people are wrongly put under surveillance. I do not say that because of some conspiracy theory, but because that is simply the nature of such things: whether it is a cock-up, a conspiracy, a simple mistake or bad faith, it will be clear that certain people, over the years, should not have been put under surveillance."

Gordon went on to say that

"there is no reason why, when it is clearly discovered that a person has wrongly been put under surveillance, that person should not be told. That seems to be a reasonable and fair safeguard for the rights of the citizen. The presence of such a provision is likely to focus the mind as to when it is appropriate to conduct surveillance operations."

He continued:

"My point is very simple. There should be a provision in the legislation so that where it becomes clear after authorisation has been given that, for whatever reason, a citizen should not have been the subject of a surveillance operation, the system is open about it . . . As I said in the chamber, that is the nature of the modern world. I am against secrecy whose only purpose is to cover up a mistake that has been made . . . There are several ways in which provision could be made—I will not teach my granny"—

I think that Gordon was referring to the Minister for Justice—

"to suck eggs. It could be done by spot checks, or the power to tell people could be given to the surveillance commissioner . . . There is any number of ways of dealing with this . . . I say that the purpose of such a provision is not to compromise operations or to help criminals, but to ensure that where someone has been put under surveillance wrongly, for whatever reason, they should be told that that has happened and it should go into the public domain. That would give the public the comfort of knowing that although the power of regulating serious powers is being given to law enforcement agencies, if someone is wrongly surveilled that fact will become public and will not remain a secret. I do not think that it is impossible to strike a balance here. I hope that the Executive will introduce such a provision before we have to argue this matter seriously in the chamber."

In correspondence with Angus MacKay, I have tried to achieve that, and I think that I have come to the bottom line. My view now is that the minister is simply opposed in principle to cases of wrong surveillance becoming public. I also quote Scott Barrie, speaking in the same stage 2 debate. He said:

"I have a great deal of sympathy with what Christine Grahame has tried to do. I am not sure that I would have voted for her amendment, because it is too wide-ranging".

Well, it ain't wide-ranging now, Scott.

Euan Robson said:

"The minister will agree that there is a degree of cross-party concern on this point. Almost all of us are concerned that the tribunal will have very little work because people will not know that they have been the subject of surveillance."—[Official Report, Justice and Home Affairs Committee, 4 July 2000; c 1556-57.]

Those comments were made at stage 2, which is a much happier place than stage 3.

Pauline McNeill: I do not know whether Christine Grahame was going to go on to name me, but she has named several members of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee and has quoted them. Other than the points raised by the committee members, does Christine feel that strong evidence was given by witnesses to the committee on her points about amendments?

Christine Grahame: I do not think that the police witnesses were terribly interested in the line that I was taking, but we must remember that the bill does not just deal with criminal investigations and drugs; it deals with public disorder and other issues. As I said earlier, I foresee that notifying people of surveillance would be more likely to happen in those circumstances where entirely innocent individuals are also involved. The problems raised by the surveillance of known felons whose associates and families are unaware of their activities are provided for under my amendment. The police witnesses focused mostly on criminal activity, which is why I quoted Gordon Jackson at length.

A tribunal is referred to in section 19. However, I do not understand how a person who has been under surveillance can use that tribunal to make a complaint. The tribunal is concerned with procedure and is a creature of the UK, operating under UK regulations. I received a letter from Angus MacKay on 28 August, when I addressed this matter. He wrote:

"I do, however, continue to have a fundamental objection to the principle on which your amendment is based, namely that there should be a duty in each and every case, irrespective of whether the surveillance was properly authorised and carried out in accordance with the appropriate code of practice, to disclose the fact of that surveillance unless the authorising officer perceives a significant risk in doing so."

That is not fair to my amendment, and reduces considerably the number of people who might be notified.

In the same letter, he says:

"You say that your proposal would be more efficient than relying on the tribunal to disclose to people who had a suspicion that surveillance had taken place. Although the rules for the tribunal's operation have not yet been finalised, it is clear that the tribunal will not allow fishing expeditions. In other words the tribunal will not confirm to someone that surveillance had taken or was taking place unless there was a case to consider."

How on earth—apart from tumbling over the infamous binocular man in the lupins—will someone ever get a tribunal to find out about surveillance? A suspicion will not clear it. The tribunal is a red herring of democracy.

At the meeting of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee yesterday, I listened carefully to Jim Wallace's views on an open and democratic Scotland. He spoke about that in the context of the future freedom of information bill. This information on surveillance is not going to be available to anybody, and that does not reflect an open and democratic Scotland. I want the Liberal Democrats to consider that, as their party has a fine record on civil liberties issues.

This is a free vote for the SNP. I hope that it is a free vote for the other parties. These are serious arguments. I hope that it is not the case that we are not going to consider this issue seriously because the new English legislation does not consider it. I am not charging the Executive with that, but I hope that—as it did earlier, for the smaller but nevertheless important issue of the catch-all subsection—the Parliament will consider this matter in the context of Scottish democracy. Recognising the openness and all the safeguards that I have built into it, I ask the Parliament to give amendment 8 a fair wind.

I move amendment 8.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I call Phil Gallie to speak to amendment 8A.

Phil Gallie: Amendment 8A will not be moved. I feel deeply chagrined by Christine Grahame's suggestion that I would be mischievous on this subject. However, I would be concerned about somebody receiving an epistle through the post that was sparse in information, telling them that they were under surveillance. That might do an individual more harm than good.

Amendments 8A and 8B not moved.

Angus MacKay: I want to make three comments, and begin by taking up the argument where Christine Grahame finished. I do not think that anyone could say that we are not going to have or have not had an appropriate and full debate on this issue. At each stage of the legislation it has been the most topical and salient of the issues the committee has wanted to discuss and I suspect that it will form the meat of the serious discussion in today's stage 3 debate. I do not think that anyone could say that we have not fully considered the issue.

I want to make clear that the Executive opposes Christine Grahame's amendments. I also want to make clear that I appreciate and understand that Christine has made a number of genuine attempts to bring forward an evolved amendment to address concerns raised by all parties in the course of considering the bill. At earlier stages I said that I am not hostile to the attempt to address those concerns, which are difficult to address because they are about a point of conflict between two things—the protection of civil liberties and the requirement that law enforcement agencies can properly and effectively carry out their work. Where those two things meet is a difficult point. I should also put on record the attempts made by members of other parties to wrestle with the issue in trying to develop an amendment that satisfies all the concerns. I am sure we will hear from other members in the debate.

The amendments in Christine Grahame's name are the latest in a series on the subject, each of which has been fully debated. I am aware that amendment 8 has been drafted to meet many of the practical objections that were raised to earlier versions, in particular the lack of safeguards, and I acknowledge that it is clearly an improvement in that respect. However, it remains the case, as Christine has highlighted, that it is based on a premise that the Executive cannot support. Beyond that, there are further practical defects that mean that it would be difficult to operate.

On the question of principle, Christine Grahame is familiar with the arguments, as I have corresponded with her over the recess. Nevertheless, the arguments should be on the record, as is Christine's viewpoint. The fundamental objection the Executive has is that the amendment specifies a duty in each and every case, irrespective of whether the surveillance was properly authorised and carried out in accordance with the appropriate code of practice, to disclose the fact of that surveillance unless the authorising officer perceives a significant risk in doing so. We believe that that would create an anomalous position when compared to other investigation techniques used by the police. The police have a duty to make all due inquiries about crime that could, for example, include seeking relevant details about suspects from other public authorities or financial institutions or perhaps putting in place a telephone intercept. In none of those cases are the police required to disclose the fact of their inquiries to the subject of them even if nothing untoward has been found. Furthermore, the police argue—we believe rightly—that to disclose in even limited circumstances how and when they might use particular techniques would, in the long run, work to the benefit of criminals rather than society generally. The use of surveillance or human sources is not different in that respect, in our view, from other methods.

Secondly, it is inevitable, despite the safeguards put in place beforehand—and many have been built into Christine's amendment—that a requirement to disclose, unless in certain circumstances, will lead to cases where it will be seen in retrospect that disclosure has helped criminals to evade justice. That is because a police officer may well take the view that there is a risk to operations, but not a significant risk as required by the amendment. But of course, he or she cannot see into the future: the risk may subsequently materialise. In our judgment, the risk that operations could be compromised could also lead to other law enforcement agencies declining to work with Scottish police forces.

11:30

I have one final point on the principle. We believe that the amendments are unnecessary because we are putting into the structure of the bill a robust system of oversight to ensure that the powers in the bill are not abused. There is the system of chief, ordinary and assistant surveillance commissioners, who will all have judicial experience and who will all have staff to assist them as required.

I have described three reasons why we consider the principle of the amendments inappropriate. There are also, as I mentioned at the outset, some practical points that would make the amendments difficult to operate. First, amendment 8 provides for a number of circumstances in which disclosure should not be made; but, as I understand the reading of it, amendment 8 does not include the situation in which surveillance has uncovered evidence of wrong-doing. The situation could therefore arise where evidence of crime was found and arrests and charges were pending, but because no further operations were planned against the target, there might be a requirement to disclose the surveillance to the suspect. I appreciate that that defect could be fixed by means of the further test that is referred to in subsection (3)(d) in amendment 8; but that illustrates the difficulties in seeking to prescribe in legislation the time when it becomes safe to reveal the use of particular law enforcement techniques.

A much more serious difficulty arises with the use of the term "significant risk" in amendment 8. We are sure that that would give rise to problems in interpretation. It would be extremely difficult to define when a risk became a significant risk. Furthermore, I am unable to agree that the same test of significant risk should apply to the security of operations and to personnel. In the Executive's view, it is right to consider that even a slight risk to the safety of people who volunteer to work in dangerous circumstances should be avoided if possible.

There are a number of practical problems with this amendment. I am sure that we could have attempted to fix some of them, although we believe that this will always be an area where it will be difficult to anticipate, properly and effectively, all the possible circumstances that might arise. More important, we cannot, as I have already stated, support the principle that disclosure must be considered in every case where surveillance has been properly authorised and carried out. I therefore call—pointlessly, I think—on Ms Grahame to withdraw amendment 8.

Dennis Canavan: I support amendment 8. The bill purports to strike a balance between individuals' rights of privacy and the interests—including the security interests—of the wider community. If there is no further reason for surveillance of a particular person, that person should surely have the right to know that he or she had been under surveillance, provided, of course, that there is no risk to any other person. Christine Grahame's amendment contains sufficient safeguards to ensure that there is little, if any, risk to any other person.

There have been some famous—or infamous—cases of people who have been under surveillance by the state. It is reported that even the present Home Secretary and the present Secretary of State for Northern Ireland were under some form of surveillance in their youth, although it is very difficult for us now to comprehend how on earth Jack Straw or Peter Mandelson could be classified as left-wing extremists. Allegations were also made during industrial disputes in the 1980s—particularly during the miners' strike of 1984-85—that miners' leaders were under surveillance through telephone tapping. Even well after the event, we are entitled to an explanation. Some of the reports may have been false, some may have been true. Perhaps the minister could enlighten us this afternoon.

Is it a fact that during the miners' strike the telephone of the late Mick McGahey, for example, was tapped? Were the telephones of any of the other strike leaders tapped, either in their offices or in their homes? In retrospect, many of us can see that the strike was about an honest group of trade unionists trying desperately to save their industry from extinction, but at that time in Scottish and British industrial history many of them were classified as enemies of the state. The police and, perhaps, other security forces were using covert means to get information to break the strike.

Ben Wallace: I do not dispute some of Mr Canavan's observations, but—and the minister may be able to clarify this—what he is talking about would be considered subversion and would be covered by the security services. Under security services legislation, people who have been under surveillance have a right to be informed of that. The period that has to elapse before that can happen is perhaps too long, but that can be changed. Such surveillance is not criminal and is not covered by this bill. Subversion comes under security service legislation, people have a right to be informed of whether they have been under surveillance, and the situation is reviewed on a 10-yearly basis.

Dennis Canavan: I read the bill as meaning that the authorities can authorise a surveillance order if they perceive there to be a threat of disorder. At the time of the miners' strike there were perceived threats, real or imaginary, of disorder. My fear is that this legislation could be used if similar circumstances ever arose. When the surveillance order is no longer applicable and the authorities admit that there is no further reason for it, the person who has been the subject of that order ought to have the right to know that he or she has been under surveillance.

In summing up, can the minister tell us who at ministerial level has access to information about people who were wrongly under surveillance some time ago during industrial disputes? At the time of the miners' strike, for example, I understand that the Secretary of State for Scotland was required to authorise telephone tapping. Where is that information now? Where is the list of people whose telephones were tapped? Is it in the Scotland Office or the Scottish Executive? Does the Minister for Justice have access to it? Does John Reid have access to it? Will the Scottish Executive be more forthcoming about telling us what went on at that critical time in Scottish industrial history?

The new Scottish Parliament is supposed to herald an era of openness, democracy and accountability, including freedom of information. We hear Executive ministers, particularly Liberal Democrats, trumpeting the desirability of freedom of information. Innocent people should have the right to know whether, why and how they were under surveillance. The state is the servant of the people and, if it makes an error, it should be big enough to admit to that and to inform the people who were wronged.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I have no wish to curtail debate on this important subject, but if we finish by 12 o'clock I will take the full half-hour debate at that point. About five or six members have indicated that they wish to speak.

Scott Barrie (Dunfermline West) (Lab): I am glad that I pressed my button to speak before I was named, and perhaps shamed, by Christine Grahame for what I said at stage 2. Her quotes from the Official Report are quite accurate. She might have gone on to say that I made similar comments in the stage 1 debate.

Christine Grahame should be congratulated on introducing a series of amendments on this important subject. She did not press her previous amendment to a vote in committee because she agreed to take it back and consider it further. Members have said that these issues strike at the heart of the bill, which is concerned with the civil liberties of our citizens versus the duties and responsibilities of the state to detect and prevent crime.

The Deputy Minister for Justice has already indicated the Executive's desire not to impede the detection and prevention of crime. Although Christine Grahame has moved a long way from the position of her original amendment, including many caveats, the new amendment does not go far enough.

I approached the subject clear in my own mind—I thought that it would be relatively straightforward to include the provisos that Dennis Canavan has just mentioned. At the beginning of the summer I intended to lodge an amendment to that effect but, unlike Christine Grahame, I was unable to come up with a form of words. As I thought through the matter it became increasingly difficult. In essence, it is something that most of us would want to do, but in reality it is something that is very difficult to achieve. That is why I think that it would be better to support the comments that Angus MacKay made this morning.

However, Christine Grahame pointed out that if the amendment was not accepted, we might be open to a challenge under the European convention on human rights. I ask the minister to make explicit what legal advice has been given, whether we are open to such a challenge and whether the Executive is totally confident that the measure is robust.

Gordon Jackson: Christine Grahame has quoted my comments at stage 2 at some length. I neither depart from those comments nor apologise for them. I said that where a surveillance operation has been wrongly carried out, the person who had been under surveillance should be told. A very strong part of me believes that; in an ideal world, that is what I would like to happen. Secrecy should not be used to hide mistakes made by the state. Given that perspective, I was anxious to achieve something in this legislation that would bring that ideal into practice. I made that clear in the committee and I have made it clear to Angus MacKay and Jim Wallace on several occasions.

No one could have tried harder than Christine Grahame—I hope that she will accept this comment in the spirit that it is given—to achieve that end. However, that is where the problem lies. Having wanted to achieve that end, one had to turn the coin in this balancing exercise and recognise that there are reasons for not doing so.

I am not here to repeat what the minister says, but some of those reasons are very powerful. The amendment would create an anomalous situation. The police carry out all sorts of investigations every day. They do not have a policy of telling the subjects of those investigations what they are doing. I accept that that is different, but it is not that different. There are practical difficulties raised by the amendment. Every authorisation for surveillance would need to be reviewed in detail retrospectively. The fact that it would create a huge mountain of work is not a reason not to do something, but it would certainly place a tremendous burden on the system.

However, most important, there are some very serious and very bad people out there—

Dennis Canavan: There are some in here, too.

11:45

Gordon Jackson: Unlike the people in here who are bad, the bad people out there are also very sophisticated. Inevitably, such people will make use of the provision created by Christine Grahame's amendment. They will take comfort from it. Whenever the authorities are forced to reveal details of their operations, people who have a bad agenda will use that for their own purposes. That is why, not without reluctance and with a great deal of hesitation, and having made my position clear at stage 2, I have come down on the side of saying that Christine Grahame's provision is not workable. I say to her that, in fairness, I did say at stage 1 that I had no concluded view and that it was a difficult matter.

It is a question of balance, and we have done well in striking it. For example, with the Executive's agreement we took out the catch-all provision. That was important. Dennis Canavan talked about surveillance situations that people should now know about, but what we have tried to do is stop those situations happening in the first place. It may be said that we will not be successful in that, but we have tried. We have made sure that we have Scottish judges as Scottish surveillance commissioners. The balance has to be that these operations take place and are not revealed thereafter. Part of me does not like that, but in this world we live in these balances have to be struck. I have come to the view that we should proceed in the way in which the Executive is suggesting.

Dorothy-Grace Elder (Glasgow) (SNP): I counsel caution—from the way in which the minister has presented this matter, that seems sensible. The proposal in the bill is dangerous, which is why I commend Christine Grahame's amendment. The concern involves the grey areas where state security services can claim that serious criminality is behind something, when it is not that at all, but just red meat politics. People may be snooping and spying on those on whom they should not snoop and spy, such as trade unionists.

Like Dennis Canavan, I would like to know the truth about telephone tapping of the late Mick McGahey, whom I knew. He was an honest man who stood up for his miners. There have been umpteen stories over the years about McGahey's phone being tapped—and, indeed, the phones of other trade union leaders in Scotland. We do not accept that that should happen just because of a person's position, which is why we must know the truth, even from the past.

Mr Canavan mentioned Jack Straw, whom he said could hardly be regarded as a great left-wing threat. Of course, at one stage Jack Straw was regarded as such. Some of us remember when he was a rebellious student leader. That was at a time of rampant paranoia about people getting their phones tapped; everybody in student circles was alleging it. I remember saying that the ultimate humiliation would be if we found out that our phone was not tapped because we were not that important. We all remember what Mr Straw was like. Of course, he changed his coat when he acquired a high position in Mr Blair's Government—a Government that has allowed more phones to be tapped than any other Government in recent decades.

Pauline McNeill: I, too, want to put on record my feelings about the history of the 1970s and 1980s, phone tapping and civil liberties issues. There is a long list of people, such as Campbell Christie, who took their cases to the European Court of Human Rights. I want clarification on how Christine Grahame's amendment would give rights to this Parliament or allow Mick McGahey to know whether his phone was tapped, given that we are not dealing with telecommunications.

Dorothy-Grace Elder: Unfortunately, the late Mick McGahey and many of his generation are not around to know the truth. However, retrospectively, even a long period afterwards, revelations should be made about the phone tapping of people who have not faced criminal charges. The minister's proposition is dangerous, and I support Christine Grahame, who eloquently and sensibly put a case that upholds civil liberties.

Mr John McAllion (Dundee East) (Lab): Dorothy-Grace Elder must be older than she looks if she can remember the time when Jack Straw was a left-wing threat to anyone. I have been in the Labour party a long time, but I am not that old.

I ask the minister to assure us that there is no disagreement in principle with what the amendment seeks to do. If the Executive and the Parliament have learned anything from their first year, surely they have learned that mistakes will be made and errors will occur. It is a fact that people who are wholly innocent will be subjected to unjustified official surveillance. We have to accept that that will happen. I want the Executive to make it clear to the Parliament that it thinks that it is wrong for that to happen. If practical, such people should have the right to know that they have been subjected unfairly to surveillance.

I realise that the important words there are "if practical". The minister outlined the practical objections, some of which I agree with. However, the fact that there are anomalies—people have the right to know about this technique but not that technique—is not an argument for not extending the right to know. The right should be extended to cover all the techniques that are used by the police forces in this country.

I take on board the view that, if the exercising of such a right represents a risk to operations in any way, it would be unwise for the Parliament or the Executive to allow that to happen. However, I hope that at the end of the debate the minister will say that what is perceived to be a risk to operations will be under continual review and that, if someone comes up with a way of guaranteeing the security of police operations while giving people the right to know that they have been under surveillance, we will ensure that that happens.

It is important that the Parliament understands the implications of the European convention on human rights. If a challenge is made to what the Parliament is enacting this morning, we should be aware of what the chances are that the European Court of Human Rights will uphold an appeal made by someone who has been denied the rights that we are discussing. I hope that the minister will deal with that.

Finally, I was interested in Christine Grahame's reference to Professor Miller's comment that the UK's record on disclosure and human rights is weak and one of the worst in Europe. Will the monarchists among us reflect that that may be the case because, unlike the residents of other countries in Europe, we are not citizens but subjects of a constitutional monarchy? Perhaps the fundamental change that the Parliament should be considering, possibly in liaison with the Parliament south of the border, is how we can move to become real citizens—like people in the rest of Europe—instead of subjects.

Euan Robson: This is potentially the most difficult area in the bill. I suspect that, when we vote that the bill be passed—as I hope we will later today—there will be some omissions. We cannot get everything right in one go, because—as I understand it—this is the first time that such a framework covering investigatory authorities and powers has been introduced.

There is a tension between the need to survey criminals and the rights of the individual, but the amendment does not deliver what is necessary. If someone has been wrongly surveyed, ideally they should be told. However, there is another element to this. I have yet to make up my mind whether, if surveillance has taken place but there has been no harm or prejudice to the person involved, it is sensible or relevant to alert them to the situation.

My key objection to the amendment, however, is that the wrong person has been identified as triggering the process that would lead to disclosure to the individual concerned. The authorising officer would be told to review what they had done and, if they had done something wrong, they would have to institute a process that would lead to the disclosure to the individual. Surely the person who should take that action is the surveillance commissioner, who should act in a regulatory capacity, as it were, in order to review the actions of the authorising officers. Members would have welcomed the incorporation of such a provision into the bill if we had been able to find a proper mechanism for so doing. Had we done so, the focus—the fulcrum—would have been the surveillance commissioner, who should have undertaken those duties and who should have been given those responsibilities. As I understand the amendment, the person who made the mistake in the first instance is the one who is being asked to trigger the process. Perhaps the authorising officer would take that action quite readily if a genuine error has been made. However, if there has been duplicity or connivance on the part of the authorising officer, is it likely that that officer would refer himself or herself to the surveillance commissioner?

I believe that this well-intentioned amendment is seriously defective in that regard, as well as in terms of the practical points made by Angus MacKay. Although a mechanism for protecting the individual would have been welcome, had we been able to find one, I do not think that the amendment delivers what members want.

Pauline McNeill: Like other members, I support the aims that Christine Grahame is trying to achieve with her amendment and I congratulate her on the work that she has done. However, on balance, a number of factors lead me to believe that I cannot support the amendment.

Emphasis must be placed on the importance of granting authorisation and on the rigorous tests that should take place before authorisation is granted in the first place. Both Dennis Canavan and Dorothy-Grace Elder mentioned telecommunications; it is important to stress that we are not dealing with telecommunications today—there has been some confusion on that point. Christine Grahame's amendment, even if we were to accept it, would not give any of us the right to know that our telephone had been tapped. Perhaps that is a debate for another day.

I want the minister to respond in the strongest terms to a number of points. The question that must be asked about the cases to which Dennis Canavan and Dorothy-Grace Elder referred is why authorisation was given in the first place. I draw members' attention to other issues that the bill raises, which the Justice and Home Affairs Committee examined in great detail, including our concern about civil liberties. Alan Miller pointed to the categories for surveillance, such as public order and public safety. In particular, he drew our attention to the bill's inclusion of the category of people who gather together for a "common purpose", which could include trade unionists. The granting of authorisation must be of the highest order for everything else to fall into place.

Phil Gallie mentioned informing people that they had been under surveillance. That raises the question whether people should be told why they had been under surveillance. An individual would certainly want to know more than the simple fact that they had been under surveillance. That leads me to believe that informing people is a difficult issue to resolve in legislation. Should people be told why? Should they be told what kind of surveillance they were under?

I still wonder whether the bill should include the category of "wrong person". By that I mean the circumstances in which surveillance is granted for person A but is, in fact, carried out on person B. However, amendment 8 does not address that issue. Records on anyone who has been placed under surveillance wrongly must be destroyed. Any individual would want to know that that had been done. Euan Robson made the point in committee that such action should not be discretionary—it should be an absolute must.

Although the minister does not accept Christine Grahame's amendment, it would be useful if, in replying to the debate, he would explain how the bill balances the rights of the individual with the needs of the state. All members of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee showed a great willingness to try to find a solution to that problem, as did the minister. There is only a tiny difference between us, but we do not think that such a solution can be reached.

12:00

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Of course, it is not the minister who will be responding; Christine Grahame will have the last word, because amendment 8 is her amendment. Nevertheless, I shall allow the minister to have another cut before asking Christine Grahame to respond.

Angus MacKay: Thank you, Presiding Officer. I would like to reply briefly to a number of concerns that have been raised by members from all parts of the chamber.

Throughout the passage of the bill, we have attempted to be sympathetic on this issue. I am on record as stating my willingness to listen to arguments about how we might be able to proceed in this area. I have met any member who wanted to meet me to discuss face to face the substance of the issues and the detail of the amendments, and we have engaged in detailed correspondence.

The problem is that nobody has, as yet, found a satisfactory way of addressing in legislation the concerns that have been raised that does not run counter to the other concerns that I have outlined. It is with regret that the Executive has arrived at this position but, having tried to satisfy those concerns, we find ourselves unable to do so. For the reasons that I outlined, we believe that Christine Grahame's amendment does not satisfactorily do so either.

The Executive, the Parliament and the Presiding Officer's office are required to ensure that any legislation, policy or practice that we pursue is ECHR compliant, and we believe that we are in that position. Ultimately, that compliance can be tested only by the courts, but we believe that what we are proposing is ECHR compliant.

As Pauline McNeill has pointed out, the bill does not cover telephone interception, so I ask members to focus on what this legislation is intended to enable police forces to do rather than on wider issues.

Members must bear in mind the fact that today we are setting in statute for the first time procedures that are already routinely used by law enforcement agencies, but without the force of statutory regulation. The whole bill is precisely about protecting civil rights and about ensuring that the enforcement agencies, when they use surveillance techniques, do so in compliance with legislation, codes of guidance and the ECHR. In formulating the legislation, we must strike a balance between what constitutes appropriate civil liberties and what constitutes appropriate law enforcement. We have sought to do that at every turn and I genuinely believe that we have struck a balance that we can be confident will serve us well in the future.

Christine Grahame: I knew which way the wind would blow from the moment I stood up to speak. It may not be the point of the exercise, but I shall be interested to see how many members will break ranks and vote for my amendment.

Angus MacKay raised the issue of significant risk. The test of significant risk rests with the authorising officer, so a disclosure will not get past him if he thinks that there is a significant risk.

John McAllion made some valid points. Of course the wrong people will be put under surveillance for the wrong reasons, but they will not be told about it. There is no way of compromising on this. If John wants people who have wrongly been put under surveillance, and who should never have been put under surveillance in the first place, to be told about it, he must vote for the amendment. This is not something that he can fence; the Executive has never been prepared to move further on the matter.

The provision in my amendment to notify surveillance subjects would be triggered only when surveillance has been quashed, ceased or cancelled, and then only if no other investigations into criminal operations would be imperilled. It is nonsense to suggest that people would be notified otherwise.

Dennis Canavan mentioned political figures, and his point was quite right. It is a bit of a red herring to keep talking about serious criminals, felons and heavy-duty drug dealers in relation to the bill. Of course the bill deals with the activities of such people, but it also deals with what might be considered criminal activity in relation to public order as defined by the authorising agencies. He is right to say that other activities such as industrial and political activity or demonstrations could come within the remit of the bill.

I do not know what else I could have done to satisfy Scott Barrie's concerns. I have put everything possible into my amendment, including a catch-all and all the safety guards that I could have included, to ensure that the state is not imperilled at all and the community's rights are given as much protection as possible.

Gordon Jackson will wait a long time if he wants to legislate in an ideal world. We are legislating in the real world. I shall quote the words that he used at stage 2. He said:

"There is any number of ways of dealing with this . . . I do not think that it is impossible to strike a balance".—[Official Report, Justice and Home Affairs Committee, 4 July 2000; c 1557.]

What has happened between stage 2 and today that he now finds it impossible to strike a balance? At stage 2, he said that he would not teach his granny to suck eggs and that he could think of all manner of ways of dealing with this problem. Did he put those suggestions to the Executive? Was he asked to do so? I have not seen any constructive attempt to bring forward an Executive amendment.

Gordon Jackson: Does Christine Grahame accept that we found it impossible to come up with a solution? There are occasions on which one says, "I believe that we can achieve this." We tried to do so in good faith. Angus MacKay would say that we tried to the point of trying where we could try no more. Other people tried—Scott Barrie tried and Pauline McNeill tried. Christine Grahame should not suggest that this was not an exercise in good faith on our part. We came to the genuine conclusion that the balance lay the other way. Sometimes people have to admit that they cannot achieve what they had hoped to achieve.

Christine Grahame: I take it Gordon Jackson is saying that there are not any number of ways of dealing with this, which was his position at stage 2. It is not his position any more. I cannot argue if he has changed his mind.

Euan Robson used the word criminals again, which I think is misleading. The amendment is not directed at the real criminality that is under surveillance. He also, intriguingly, asked what the problem was if somebody had been under surveillance and no harm or prejudice had come to them. If my privacy has been invaded, I consider that harm or prejudice has been done to me. I do not want people opening my mail, listening to my telephone conversations and looking through long lenses at me and my cats. I have real problems with that.

Euan Robson: Those are circumstance where definite harm is being done to someone. In some circumstances, it is difficult to say that any distinctive harm has been done to someone as a result of them being followed or watched.

Will Christine Grahame also address the point about the authorising officer being the person who triggers the process?

Christine Grahame: If Euan Robson would not be unhappy that people had followed him without him knowing, that is okay for him. I would be unhappy about it.

Euan Robson's other point is that the wrong person would be making the decision. Why did he not discuss that with me, if that is his major objection to the amendment? I was open to listening to people's arguments and he never discussed that with me. The amendment is fine as it stands.

I will ask Angus MacKay a final question. Who on earth will apply to the tribunal if they feel that there is a complaint about procedure? I would like an example—we failed to get an example on the miscellaneous and the catch-all.

Angus MacKay: Anybody who is being brought before a court of law in which evidence is being used that was gathered under the provisions of the bill.

Christine Grahame: So it would not be somebody who had been under surveillance and did not know about it—they would not be able to come before the tribunal?

Angus MacKay: Any other person who is concerned that they have been the subject of surveillance, as provided for under the bill, can raise the concern with the commissioners and the tribunal and every complaint will be examined. That is not to say that information will be disclosed, but every complaint will be examined.

Christine Grahame: That does not satisfy me. Angus MacKay has already said that there will be no fishing expeditions, so it will always be in the hands of the authority to say that there has not been surveillance. The person will never know.

Angus MacKay: There will be no fishing expeditions for criminals who might seek to clarify whether they have been the subjects of surveillance. If a criminal in that circumstance applies to find out whether they have been under surveillance improperly, the appropriate structure would examine that complaint and report back that the complaint was either founded or not founded. We will not allow fishing expeditions through records, which would tell criminals whether they have been the subjects of surveillance and, if so, how.

Christine Grahame: I am grateful for that clarification, because that was not in the minister's letter to me. The letter states:

"Although the rules for the tribunal's operation have not yet been finalised, it is clear that the tribunal will not allow fishing expeditions."

It does not say "for criminals", just "fishing expeditions".

I will press my amendment.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The question is, that amendment 8, in the name of Christine Grahame, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

Members: No.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: There will be a division.

FOR

Adam, Brian (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Campbell, Colin (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Canavan, Dennis (Falkirk West)
Crawford, Bruce (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Cunningham, Roseanna (Perth) (SNP)
Elder, Dorothy-Grace (Glasgow) (SNP)
Ewing, Dr Winnie (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Ewing, Fergus (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP)
Ewing, Mrs Margaret (Moray) (SNP)
Fabiani, Linda (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Gibson, Mr Kenneth (Glasgow) (SNP)
Grahame, Christine (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Hamilton, Mr Duncan (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Harper, Robin (Lothians) (Green)
Hyslop, Fiona (Lothians) (SNP)
Ingram, Mr Adam (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Lochhead, Richard (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
MacAskill, Mr Kenny (Lothians) (SNP)
MacDonald, Ms Margo (Lothians) (SNP)
Matheson, Michael (Central Scotland) (SNP)
McGugan, Irene (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
McLeod, Fiona (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Morgan, Alasdair (Galloway and Upper Nithsdale) (SNP)
Paterson, Mr Gil (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Quinan, Mr Lloyd (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Robison, Shona (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Ullrich, Kay (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Welsh, Mr Andrew (Angus) (SNP)
White, Ms Sandra (Glasgow) (SNP)
Wilson, Andrew (Central Scotland) (SNP)

AGAINST

Aitken, Bill (Glasgow) (Con)
Alexander, Ms Wendy (Paisley North) (Lab)
Baillie, Jackie (Dumbarton) (Lab)
Barrie, Scott (Dunfermline West) (Lab)
Boyack, Sarah (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
Brankin, Rhona (Midlothian) (Lab)
Brown, Robert (Glasgow) (LD)
Chisholm, Malcolm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab)
Craigie, Cathie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab)
Curran, Ms Margaret (Glasgow Baillieston) (Lab)
Douglas-Hamilton, Lord James (Lothians) (Con)
Eadie, Helen (Dunfermline East) (Lab)
Ferguson, Patricia (Glasgow Maryhill) (Lab)
Finnie, Ross (West of Scotland) (LD)
Galbraith, Mr Sam (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)
Gallie, Phil (South of Scotland) (Con)
Gillon, Karen (Clydesdale) (Lab)
Godman, Trish (West Renfrewshire) (Lab)
Goldie, Miss Annabel (West of Scotland) (Con)
Gorrie, Donald (Central Scotland) (LD)
Grant, Rhoda (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Gray, Iain (Edinburgh Pentlands) (Lab)
Harding, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Henry, Hugh (Paisley South) (Lab)
Home Robertson, Mr John (East Lothian) (Lab)
Hughes, Janis (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab)
Jackson, Dr Sylvia (Stirling) (Lab)
Jackson, Gordon (Glasgow Govan) (Lab)
Jamieson, Cathy (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab)
Jamieson, Margaret (Kilmarnock and Loudoun) (Lab)
Jenkins, Ian (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD)
Johnston, Nick (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Johnstone, Alex (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Kerr, Mr Andy (East Kilbride) (Lab)
Livingstone, Marilyn (Kirkcaldy) (Lab)
Lyon, George (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
Macdonald, Lewis (Aberdeen Central) (Lab)
Macintosh, Mr Kenneth (Eastwood) (Lab)
MacKay, Angus (Edinburgh South) (Lab)
MacLean, Kate (Dundee West) (Lab)
Macmillan, Maureen (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Martin, Paul (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab)
McAllion, Mr John (Dundee East) (Lab)
McAveety, Mr Frank (Glasgow Shettleston) (Lab)
McCabe, Mr Tom (Hamilton South) (Lab)
McConnell, Mr Jack (Motherwell and Wishaw) (Lab)
McGrigor, Mr Jamie (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
McIntosh, Mrs Lyndsay (Central Scotland) (Con)
McLeish, Henry (Central Fife) (Lab)
McLetchie, David (Lothians) (Con)
McMahon, Mr Michael (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab)
McNeil, Mr Duncan (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab)
McNulty, Des (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab)
Monteith, Mr Brian (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Morrison, Mr Alasdair (Western Isles) (Lab)
Muldoon, Bristow (Livingston) (Lab)
Mulligan, Mrs Mary (Linlithgow) (Lab)
Mundell, David (South of Scotland) (Con)
Munro, Mr John (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD)
Murray, Dr Elaine (Dumfries) (Lab)
Oldfather, Irene (Cunninghame South) (Lab)
Peacock, Peter (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Peattie, Cathy (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Radcliffe, Nora (Gordon) (LD)
Robson, Euan (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD)
Rumbles, Mr Mike (West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine) (LD)
Scanlon, Mary (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Scott, John (Ayr) (Con)
Scott, Tavish (Shetland) (LD)
Simpson, Dr Richard (Ochil) (Lab)
Smith, Elaine (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab)
Smith, Iain (North-East Fife) (LD)
Stone, Mr Jamie (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
Thomson, Elaine (Aberdeen North) (Lab)
Tosh, Mr Murray (South of Scotland) (Con)
Wallace, Ben (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Wallace, Mr Jim (Orkney) (LD)
Whitefield, Karen (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab)
Wilson, Allan (Cunninghame North) (Lab)

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The result of the division is: For 30, Against 79, Abstentions 0.

Amendment 8 disagreed to.

Section 19—Complaints to the Tribunal

Amendments 21, 65 and 66 moved—[Angus MacKay]—and agreed to.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I call Michael Matheson to speak to and move amendment 6.

Michael Matheson: If one found oneself before the tribunal, which—given the debate we have just had—is unlikely, one might choose to have some form of legal representation. However, under the bill at present, one would have no entitlement to legal aid to pay for that representation. Very few people are likely to be able to go before the tribunal, as they will not be informed if they have been under surveillance, so I assume that the Executive would not refuse the amendment on the grounds of cost to the Legal Aid Board.

I believe that anyone who is before a tribunal should be provided with the legal representation they require. However, in the light of information that was presented to the committee this week about action that is currently being taken in court, I do not intend to move the amendment.

Amendment 6 not moved.

Section 20—Issue and revision of codes of practice

Amendments 67 to 69 moved—[Angus MacKay]—and agreed to.

Section 22—Effect of codes of practice

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I call Angus MacKay to move amendment 22 and to speak to amendments 22 and 24.

Angus MacKay: These are technical amendments. Amendment 22 corrects an incorrect cross-reference. Amendment 24 corrects cross-references in section 24(3)(a) on order-making powers that are contained in the bill. It appears that those references became false following the insertion at stage 2 of requirements for certain orders and regulations to be subject to affirmative procedure.

I move amendment 22.

Amendment 22 agreed to.

Amendments 70 to 72 moved—[Angus MacKay]—and agreed to.

Section 24—Orders and regulations

Amendment 24 moved—[Angus MacKay]—and agreed to.

Amendment 9 not moved.

Section 25—Financial provision

Amendment 73 moved—[Angus MacKay]—and agreed to.

Section 27—Interpretation

Amendment 74 moved—[Angus MacKay]—and agreed to.

12:15

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I call Michael Matheson to speak to and move amendment 7.

Michael Matheson: Amendment 7 refers to section 27 on interpretation. The bill provides no definition of what should be classed as a large group when a warrant is issued. As the bill stands, one of the tests for serious crime is

"that the conduct involves the use of violence, results in substantial financial gain or is conduct by a large number of persons in pursuit of a common purpose."

In committee, we had a wide-ranging discussion as there was concern that the bill did not provide a definition of a large group. A large group could be considered to be three people, standing outside Faslane, demonstrating on nuclear disarmament. I also understand from my colleagues on the committee that, in criminal law, a mob is classed as a group of between two and three individuals. To ensure that we remove the arbitrary aspect of the bill, we should provide a definition of a large group.

The minister will say, I am sure, that six is an arbitrary figure, but the bill is arbitrary in providing no definition. That arbitrariness would be removed by stating a figure and it is reasonable to state that a large group consists of six or more individuals.

Several members of the committee were sympathetic on the issue, in particular Gordon Jackson, who highlighted the fact that a situation could arise in which after a warrant has been granted, the matter goes to court and a serious argument ensues about whether the warrant should have been issued for a large group of people. Courts could be delayed as a result. That is why we should remove the arbitrary nature of the bill by including a definition of the number of people that constitutes a large group. If the Executive refuses to accept the amendment, we may have to wait for case law to determine what constitutes a large group. I see no harm in defining in the bill the number of people at which a group is considered to be large.

I move amendment 7.

Mr Jim Wallace: There are a number of points to make in relation to amendment 7, which was discussed at stage 2 when the figure proposed by Mr Matheson was, I believe, 10.

It is important to track the matter back. The figure relates to the definition of serious crime, which is outlined in section 27(7) of the bill. Where serious crime arises, no authorisation for intrusive surveillance—which is about the highest category of surveillance and includes bugging devices in a residential property—will be granted under section 6(2)

"unless the chief constable or the Director General granting it is satisfied—

(a) that the authorisation is necessary for the purpose of preventing or detecting serious crime; and

(b) that the authorised surveillance is proportionate to what is sought to be achieved by carrying it out."

The example that Michael Matheson mentioned—of three, or 33, people protesting outside the Faslane facility—becomes unlikely given both the test of proportionality and the definition of serious crime.

Mr Matheson also said that we might have to wait some time for a court case to come up in order to define the term "serious crime". However, it is important to note that the definition of serious crime that is contained in the bill has existed for the 15 years since the Interception of Communications Act 1985 came into force. In that time, a court case has not been needed as a result of how that act has operated. The definition is also contained in the Police Act 1997 and the Security Services Act 1996. It makes sense for the same test to be applied for similar activities carried out by different bodies involved in investigating serious crime.

During the stage 2 debate, it was suggested that the definition of serious crime might be open to challenge as it is arbitrary. However, who might challenge it? The bodies that will be responsible for the oversight of the application of the definition of serious crime contained in the bill will be the surveillance commissioners. The chief surveillance commissioner has assured us that he is happy with the current definition. Furthermore, it should be noted that on no occasion since 1985 have any of the three distinguished members of the judiciary who have held the post of interception commissioner ever found any difficulty with the definition of serious crime, nor have any of the other commissioners who have considered cases where this definition has been used.

As the Parliament knows, complaints brought in relation to conduct under the bill will be dealt with by a tribunal that is to be set up. The tribunal will replace the security service, the interception of communications and the intelligence services tribunals, none of which has ever queried the definition of serious crime. That suggests strongly that the definition of serious crime that is contained in the bill has been found to be perfectly workable by those who have had to apply it under similar legislation. Changing the bill along the lines that have been suggested would introduce an element of inflexibility that would not serve the public interest.

The stage 2 debate illustrated clearly that it is difficult to quantify in the abstract the number of persons who might be in pursuit of a common criminal purpose that will be regarded as constituting a serious crime. It is arbitrary to pluck a figure out of the air; indeed, Mr Matheson proposed 10 people at stage 2 and now proposes six. What if five people were conspiring seriously to defraud people of their savings? Under Mr Matheson's amendment, law enforcement agencies would be shackled. They might not be able to carry out the surveillance that would be necessary for the protection of the public, as the situation would no longer fall within the definition of serious crime.

Each situation must be examined case by case, which is what has happened in the past 15 years. There will be occasions on which five people acting with a common purpose will be serious enough to justify the use of intrusive surveillance. On the other hand, seven people acting in another criminal context might not be considered sufficiently serious to warrant intrusive surveillance. The bill and the codes of practice emphasise that proportionality is an important concept in determining the application of the provision; we should not set an arbitrary fixed number of persons.

For those reasons, we will resist the amendment. Indeed, we hope that Mr Matheson might even have been persuaded that there are good reasons for withdrawing it.

Phil Gallie: During stage 2, I lodged an amendment that attempted to define a large number as six or more. That was based on my fear that cases brought before the court might flounder through a lack of certainty about the definition of a large number. Criminals who have been found guilty have walked free recently because of technical difficulties with their convictions. I would hate to think that, somewhere along the line, someone who has had the finger pointed at them and been found guilty might evade any consequences through some spurious argument about what constitutes a large crowd.

Dennis Canavan: Does the Scottish Tory party constitute a large number of people in pursuit of a common purpose, or is it a minuscule number of people in pursuit of no purpose?

Phil Gallie: The Scottish Tory party represents a smaller presence than in the past, but one that will grow and blossom in the future, as it did in the Ayr by-election when John Scott showed the way.

The minister should consider the issue again and, if nothing else, he should give definite guarantees that never will a criminal escape the consequences of his actions because of a failure to define a large crowd.

Michael Matheson: I take on board the minister's comments on the definition of serious crime. However, I do not know whether he is aware that a number of experienced individuals misinterpreted this section of the bill, in particular section 27(7)(b), which they thought might apply to a large number of people not committing a serious crime but acting politically or in some other way. Concern was expressed about the need to tighten up this section of the bill.

The minister referred to the fact that a case-by-case approach would be used. The problem with that is that we would end up with a succession of arbitrary figures, as each case might result in a different number being used: a large group for one case might be 10, while for another case it might be seven. The amendment provides a figure for the definition of a large group and removes, rather than creates, any problem relating to making the judgment more arbitrary. I hope that the minister will be persuaded of the need to set such a figure in the bill. On that basis, I press my amendment.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The question is, that amendment 7, in the name of Michael Matheson, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

Members: No.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: There will be a division.

FOR

Adam, Brian (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Aitken, Bill (Glasgow) (Con)
Campbell, Colin (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Canavan, Dennis (Falkirk West)
Crawford, Bruce (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Cunningham, Roseanna (Perth) (SNP)
Douglas-Hamilton, Lord James (Lothians) (Con)
Elder, Dorothy-Grace (Glasgow) (SNP)
Ewing, Dr Winnie (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Ewing, Fergus (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP)
Ewing, Mrs Margaret (Moray) (SNP)
Fabiani, Linda (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Gallie, Phil (South of Scotland) (Con)
Gibson, Mr Kenneth (Glasgow) (SNP)
Goldie, Miss Annabel (West of Scotland) (Con)
Grahame, Christine (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Hamilton, Mr Duncan (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Harding, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Harper, Robin (Lothians) (Green)
Hyslop, Fiona (Lothians) (SNP)
Ingram, Mr Adam (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Johnston, Nick (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Johnstone, Alex (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Lochhead, Richard (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
MacAskill, Mr Kenny (Lothians) (SNP)
MacDonald, Ms Margo (Lothians) (SNP)
Matheson, Michael (Central Scotland) (SNP)
McGrigor, Mr Jamie (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
McGugan, Irene (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
McIntosh, Mrs Lyndsay (Central Scotland) (Con)
McLeod, Fiona (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Morgan, Alasdair (Galloway and Upper Nithsdale) (SNP)
Mundell, David (South of Scotland) (Con)
Paterson, Mr Gil (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Quinan, Mr Lloyd (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Robison, Shona (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Scanlon, Mary (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Scott, John (Ayr) (Con)
Tosh, Mr Murray (South of Scotland) (Con)
Ullrich, Kay (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Wallace, Ben (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Welsh, Mr Andrew (Angus) (SNP)
White, Ms Sandra (Glasgow) (SNP)
Wilson, Andrew (Central Scotland) (SNP)

AGAINST

Baillie, Jackie (Dumbarton) (Lab)
Barrie, Scott (Dunfermline West) (Lab)
Boyack, Sarah (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
Brankin, Rhona (Midlothian) (Lab)
Brown, Robert (Glasgow) (LD)
Chisholm, Malcolm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab)
Craigie, Cathie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab)
Curran, Ms Margaret (Glasgow Baillieston) (Lab)
Eadie, Helen (Dunfermline East) (Lab)
Ferguson, Patricia (Glasgow Maryhill) (Lab)
Finnie, Ross (West of Scotland) (LD)
Galbraith, Mr Sam (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)
Gillon, Karen (Clydesdale) (Lab)
Godman, Trish (West Renfrewshire) (Lab)
Gorrie, Donald (Central Scotland) (LD)
Grant, Rhoda (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Gray, Iain (Edinburgh Pentlands) (Lab)
Henry, Hugh (Paisley South) (Lab)
Home Robertson, Mr John (East Lothian) (Lab)
Hughes, Janis (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab)
Jackson, Dr Sylvia (Stirling) (Lab)
Jackson, Gordon (Glasgow Govan) (Lab)
Jamieson, Cathy (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab)
Jamieson, Margaret (Kilmarnock and Loudoun) (Lab)
Jenkins, Ian (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD)
Kerr, Mr Andy (East Kilbride) (Lab)
Livingstone, Marilyn (Kirkcaldy) (Lab)
Lyon, George (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
Macdonald, Lewis (Aberdeen Central) (Lab)
Macintosh, Mr Kenneth (Eastwood) (Lab)
MacKay, Angus (Edinburgh South) (Lab)
MacLean, Kate (Dundee West) (Lab)
Macmillan, Maureen (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Martin, Paul (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab)
McAllion, Mr John (Dundee East) (Lab)
McAveety, Mr Frank (Glasgow Shettleston) (Lab)
McCabe, Mr Tom (Hamilton South) (Lab)
McLeish, Henry (Central Fife) (Lab)
McMahon, Mr Michael (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab)
McNeil, Mr Duncan (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab)
McNeill, Pauline (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab)
McNulty, Des (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab)
Morrison, Mr Alasdair (Western Isles) (Lab)
Muldoon, Bristow (Livingston) (Lab)
Mulligan, Mrs Mary (Linlithgow) (Lab)
Munro, Mr John (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD)
Murray, Dr Elaine (Dumfries) (Lab)
Oldfather, Irene (Cunninghame South) (Lab)
Peacock, Peter (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Peattie, Cathy (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Radcliffe, Nora (Gordon) (LD)
Robson, Euan (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD)
Rumbles, Mr Mike (West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine) (LD)
Scott, Tavish (Shetland) (LD)
Simpson, Dr Richard (Ochil) (Lab)
Smith, Elaine (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab)
Smith, Iain (North-East Fife) (LD)
Smith, Margaret (Edinburgh West) (LD)
Stone, Mr Jamie (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
Thomson, Elaine (Aberdeen North) (Lab)
Wallace, Mr Jim (Orkney) (LD)
Whitefield, Karen (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab)
Wilson, Allan (Cunninghame North) (Lab)

The Deputy Presiding Officer: The result of the division is: For 44, Against 63, Abstentions 0.

Amendment 7 disagreed to.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We have made good speed and delivered fair scrutiny. That concludes the consideration of amendments to the bill.

12:30

Meeting suspended until 14:30.

14:30

On resuming—

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): Before we begin this afternoon's business I advise members that if, as is likely, the afternoon's business concludes early, I understand that Mr Tom McCabe will seek the Parliament's leave to move a motion to bring forward decision time. Members should be aware that decision time may take place a lot earlier than 5 o'clock.

Secondly, I am sure that members would wish to welcome the third of the Westminster leaders to visit us in this Parliament, the Rt Hon Charles Kennedy MP, leader of the Liberal Democrats. [Applause.]

Question Time

SCOTTISH EXECUTIVE

Ferry Services

1. Tavish Scott (Shetland) (LD): To ask the Scottish Executive when it expects to name the preferred bidder for the northern isles ferry services and when a formal contract is to be issued. (S1O-2159)

The Minister for Transport and the Environment (Sarah Boyack): The preferred bidder will be decided shortly. The formal contract will be concluded as soon as negotiations with the preferred bidder are finalised.

Tavish Scott: In passing, I would like to welcome to the visitors' gallery today the convener of Shetland Islands Council, who has a not inconsiderable interest in this issue.

Does the minister accept that there is deep concern in the northern isles over the delay in awarding this contract, and particularly among ferry staff, who at this time are uncertain about the future of their positions? Does she also accept that, if the contract is awarded from this time of year in 2002, it will lead to difficulties for a smooth transition, not least because this is the middle of the livestock season and because of the larger number of fish and salmon exports that occur at this time of year? When can we expect to hear a decision on this important matter?

Sarah Boyack: Shortly. The issues that Tavish Scott raised give members some sense of the complexity that is involved in making sure that we get this decision right. It is important to us that we do so. On the question of when we move to the next contract, we have had discussions with the current contractor with a view to agreeing an extension of its existing contract to ensure that the whole process is managed smoothly, so that island residents' and visitors' use of the services is not interrupted.

Dr Winnie Ewing (Highlands and Islands) (SNP): If the consortium, which includes Caledonian MacBrayne and the Royal Bank of Scotland, were to succeed with the tender, where would the discussions that CalMac is currently having on the options on the west coast and the Clyde stand? Would that option be part of a single franchise, or would it stand alone? What about the assets, including the boats? If the option of a ship-holding company is introduced, how does CalMac tie in in the northern isles if it succeeds with the Western Isles and the Clyde?

Sarah Boyack: There would be no tie-in procedure, because we have a clear process for the northern isles ferry contracts. We have been through that process and we are nearing its end, therefore there would be no direct link in the way that is suggested.

Mr Jamie Stone (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD): The minister will be aware that there is some concern in my constituency also regarding possible pier sizes, the installation of new ferries in 2002 and so on. What measures will she take to address those concerns in the Scrabster and north Caithness area?

Sarah Boyack: Jamie Stone is correct; there are a number of issues that we must ensure we get right. When I visited Scrabster this summer it was useful to see the condition of the existing facilities. The facilities and the ferries are currently under discussion, and we hope to be able to move forward shortly.

Creative Industries

2. Allan Wilson (Cunninghame North) (Lab): To ask the Scottish Executive how the effectiveness of the £25 million strategy to develop the creative industries in Scotland as drawn up as part of the Scottish Enterprise clusters plan will be measured. (S1O-2184)

The Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning (Henry McLeish): The strategy will be monitored against the targets that Scottish Enterprise has set to increase the sector by 30 per cent over the next five years and to raise its export performance to 15 per cent of the Scottish total. Individual projects will be monitored on a regular basis to ensure that strategy targets are met.

Allan Wilson: As the minister will know, Scottish Enterprise predicts that the creative industries are set to grow significantly faster than the economy as a whole. Does the minister recognise that many employees in the creative sector have unstructured and unconventional career patterns? How does the Executive plan to support those individuals and sustain that employment growth?

Henry McLeish: I recognise Allan Wilson's point. It is important that, for an industry of almost 100,000 people that contributes £5 billion to the Scottish economy, we make special efforts to ensure that the choice and flexibility that Allan Wilson has suggested is in place. The spirit of the question is very much in the spirit of lifelong learning: that people have real choices and that those choices are suited to the type of skills, ambitions and aspirations that are found in the creative economy.

Dental Services

3. Lewis Macdonald (Aberdeen Central) (Lab): To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to improve emergency dental services in Aberdeen. (S1O-2172)

The Deputy Minister for Community Care (Iain Gray): It is for Grampian Primary Care NHS Trust to make arrangements for emergency provision in its area. Dentists in the Grampian area who have patients registered with them under national health service capitation or continuing care arrangements are required to provide emergency cover to those patients under their NHS terms of service. In addition, the trust has arrangements in place to provide emergency dental services for unregistered patients and is currently discussing with the Executive the development of a more comprehensive emergency dental service for Grampian.

Lewis Macdonald: I thank the minister for his reply and welcome the fact that those discussions are taking place.

Does the minister recognise that dentists in Aberdeen provide more out-of-hours care for dental patients than is provided anywhere else in Scotland? Grampian doctors on call service offers an excellent out-of-hours medical service at the new primary care resource base at Foresterhill health centre. Will he take this opportunity to extend the principle of that kind of out-of-hours service to providing dental treatment of the same high quality?

Iain Gray: I acknowledge Mr Macdonald's interest in that area—I have answered questions from him before. I agree that the out-of-hours general medical practitioners service in Grampian and Aberdeen is particularly good. I asked my officials to speak to the primary care trust and it has assured me that it is considering that service, with the intention of establishing whether it can build out-of-hours emergency dental services in a similar fashion.

Mrs Margaret Ewing (Moray) (SNP): Does the minister agree that part of the problem is that fewer than 50 per cent of patients in the Grampian area are registered with national health service dentists, which is the result of successive Governments' policies on charging? What action is being taken to improve that situation in the Grampian area?

This issue is particularly important in my constituency, where visiting consultants are crucial. If we had the correct number of orthodontists, we could avoid some of the emergencies to which the minister has referred. The Minister for Health and Community Care promised me action on 6 March. Is the Deputy Minister for Community Care satisfied with the progress that has been made to ensure that we have the correct number of orthodontists to serve the area?

Iain Gray: We have begun to make some progress. Progress could always be faster—we would always like it to be faster. We recently published "An Action Plan for Dental Services in Scotland", which contains some immediate measures that will be taken. The plan has been discussed and agreed with the British Dental Association. It includes a review of some of the issues that Mrs Ewing raises, for example access to NHS dentists. Measures are in progress—I hope that we will see the benefits of them soon.

Mr Mike Rumbles (West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine) (LD): The minister will recall that I asked him about rural dental services in July. I lodged a written question on whether the Executive had any plans to introduce a dental strategy for rural Scotland. The reply referred me to the document he mentioned, in which there is only one reference to rural dental services. My question is still whether the minister has any plans to tackle the specific problems of providing an effective NHS dental service to rural Scotland.

The Presiding Officer: The question is about services in Aberdeen city. Does the minister have a reply?

Iain Gray: It is a fair comment from Mr Rumbles: access in rural areas in particular is not prominent in the document. However, improving access to dental services is part of the main thrust of our future work. I note his point that there are particular problems in rural Scotland—we must take cognisance of that.

National Health Service

4. Irene McGugan (North-East Scotland) (SNP): To ask the Scottish Executive whether the priorities for health boards and trusts of reducing waiting lists and improving service delivery to patients are compatible with meeting financial targets including, in many cases, recovering from a deficit. (S1O-2175) The Minister for Health and Community Care (Susan Deacon): Yes. Sound financial management is key to the effectiveness of any organisation, including the NHS. Record additional investment, together with radical reform and effective management, will deliver improvements in service delivery to patients.

Irene McGugan: I thank the minister for her answer.

Will the minister give an assurance to the patients of Tayside, for example, that efforts by Tayside University Hospitals NHS Trust to reduce a waiting list of more than 8,000, while tackling a budget deficit of at least £14 million, will not be at the expense of the withdrawal of certain procedures, refusal to treat certain conditions or removal of patients from the waiting list? In short, can she guarantee that there will be no reduction in standards of health care or service delivery?

Susan Deacon: The guarantee that I can give, and that I have given in this chamber on many occasions, is that the Executive will continue to allocate record additional sums of money to the NHS in Tayside, just as it will to other parts of the country. We will continue to work through the measures that we have taken, such as the task force that is working in Tayside, in order to ensure that effective financial management systems are put in place. We will continue to drive effective change in services, as we have done in other parts of the country.

In order to provide the guarantee that Irene McGugan is looking for, an effective health care system must operate in Tayside for the benefit of patients. We are working in that direction and I hope that local management will continue to do so.

Mary Scanlon (Highlands and Islands) (Con): Will the health boards and trusts be allowed to spend the resources that are to be redistributed under the Arbuthnott report in line with their clinical priorities, or will the minister issue more guidelines, targets, aims and objectives? Will the drive to achieve efficiency savings be relaxed under the new guidelines?

Susan Deacon: It is interesting that many of the same members who look to the Executive to achieve change, set targets and drive forward improvements in waiting times seem to have difficulties when we put in place measures to ensure that those steps are taken in every part of the country.

Only today, we have seen in the Arbuthnott review major radical change in the way in which we allocate NHS resources across Scotland, ensuring that those resources are allocated on the basis of need. Of course it is for local health boards and trusts to take decisions that will meet local need, but we will continue to drive change at a strategic, national level, to ensure that waiting times are reduced, that health inequalities are tackled and that clinical priorities—cancer, coronary heart disease and mental health—are also tackled effectively. It is our duty to do so.

Elaine Smith (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab): Further to the minister's comments on waiting lists and service delivery to patients, will she outline what measures, if any, to reduce waiting times for GP appointments are being considered, and whether performance targets are set and monitored for those appointments?

Susan Deacon: Tackling and reducing waiting times at every stage of a patient's experience is an absolute priority for the Scottish Executive and for the NHS in Scotland. I am pleased that the most recent figures show that steady progress is being made in reducing waiting times. An important part of that progress is a reduction in waiting times for GP appointments, but we want reduced waiting times throughout the system, from GP practice to outpatient clinic and from hospital to home. Our modernisation agenda for the NHS in Scotland looks at the patient's journey across all those areas.

Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982

5. Michael Matheson (Central Scotland) (SNP): To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to review the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982. (S1O-2156)

The Deputy Minister for Local Government (Mr Frank McAveety): I am pleased to say that the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities has agreed to join the Scottish Executive in a task group, which will review the licensing provisions in the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982.

Michael Matheson: When I wrote to the Deputy Minister for Local Government earlier this year on behalf of a constituent who was attacked by a dog, he advised me that one of the pieces of legislation that could be used against dangerous dogs was the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982. I took his advice and pursued the matter with Central Scotland police, but the police's legal advice was that the relevant section of that act is not compliant with the European convention on human rights. Will the minister undertake a review of the relevant section of the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982, in order to ensure that there are proper provisions in place to deal with dangerous dogs and, in particular, that those provisions are ECHR compliant?

Mr McAveety: I am happy to say that that element of the legislation will be considered as part of the task force's work. If, in the interim, Mr Matheson would like me to encourage dogs to heed the ECHR, I shall be happy to do so.

Sutherland Report

6. Mr Duncan Hamilton (Highlands and Islands) (SNP): To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made regarding the implementation of the Sutherland report on long-term care for the elderly. (S1O-2192)

The Deputy Minister for Community Care (Iain Gray): We are implementing one of the two main recommendations on the regulation of care. The recommendations on charging for care are being considered in the spending review. We are making considerable progress in implementing other recommendations.

Mr Hamilton: Is the Minister aware of the 18-month delay in responding to the issue of charging? Does he accept that an irresistible coalition has been formed in this chamber to call for full implementation of the Sutherland recommendations? Does he know that members of every party in this chamber—including his coalition partners and most of his Labour back benchers—want full implementation? Will he support the key recommendation that nursing care and personal care should be free?

Iain Gray: There is no delay. The charging recommendation was always going to be part of the next comprehensive spending review process, which is now coming to a close. I made that clear on 2 December 1999, and again on 10 February, 2 March and 9 March this year. It does not matter how many times Mr Hamilton or his colleagues ask the question; that has been the clear answer, and there has been no delay. When the time comes, we will respond.

Lord James Douglas-Hamilton (Lothians) (Con): Will the minister explain why there appears to be a continuing delay if there is a decisive majority in this Parliament in favour of immediate implementation?

Iain Gray: I have already explained that there is no delay. The process that is being followed is the process that we have always described. I am puzzled by the contention that there is a demonstrative majority in this Parliament; I do not think that that contention has ever been tested.

Dennis Canavan (Falkirk West): Is the minister aware that some old people are literally worried sick about how they are going to meet the costs, if and when they are taken into residential care? Will the Scottish Executive therefore implement Professor Sutherland's recommendations in full, particularly the recommendation that personal care costs should be met from public funds? Will he do that and do it soon, rather than simply follow the shabby compromise announced by the Government at Westminster?

Iain Gray: I spend a great deal of my time meeting older people, their organisations and those working with them, so I am conscious of their concern that the quality and extent of care for the elderly should be extended. Whether the Sutherland recommendation on personal care would be the best and most effective way of doing that is another question altogether, and one that we shall answer when we report on the spending review, as we have repeatedly undertaken to do.

Genetically Modified Organisms

7. Maureen Macmillan (Highlands and Islands) (Lab): To ask the Scottish Executive what consultation was carried out with the communities neighbouring Rosskill on the Black Isle before it was decided to conduct GM crop trials there. (S1O-2169)

The Minister for Rural Affairs (Ross Finnie): There is, I regret, no statutory provision for carrying out public consultation under the regulations and legislation governing this matter. I recognise that there is a real distinction to be made between proper consultation and public information and, in the absence of a proper consultative framework, I have taken steps to ensure that meetings will be held in the local communities where all the crop trials are to take place, with a view to increasing public access to information on the topic.

Maureen Macmillan: Does the minister accept that the communities in the Black Isle are extremely angry and frustrated? Given that Highland Council has tried unsuccessfully to have the trials halted, and given the concerns of the local MP and MSPs, does he agree that the situation is extremely unhappy? Does he further agree with the position of members of the European Parliament, who have called for measures to ensure that consultation procedures are conducted under clear rules of openness and transparency with full public access?

Ross Finnie: Let me reiterate an important point. The one thing on which the Scottish Executive and those in the Black Isle are absolutely agreed is that the prime concern is about danger to public health or to environmental safety. In discharging my responsibilities in this area, I take advice from the Food Standards Agency and from the Advisory Committee on Releases to the Environment. Unless I receive totally unambiguous advice that the trials will pose no risk to public health or to environmental safety, I would not and will not consider granting those trials.

I will deal with the second issue, which I regard as unsatisfactory, which is the fact that although EU directive 90/220/EEC refers obliquely to public consultation, there is no legislative framework for carrying that out. The Environmental Protection Act 1990, which gave rise to the implementation of that directive, is silent on that matter which makes it extremely difficult.

Public consultation must be a process in which the consultee believes he or she can influence the outcome. It would be an act of sheer hypocrisy for me to hold a meeting in public and claim that that was public consultation. That is why I have stuck to providing information because I would be misleading the public if I were to do otherwise.

After I have so satisfied myself in terms of the regulation, there are no powers within that regulatory framework that would allow me to defer or postpone a decision.

Mr John Munro (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD): In view of the fact that the Scottish Natural Heritage northern board has now withdrawn its approval for the GM crop trials at Rosskill farm in the Black Isle, will the minister reconsider his position and stop this doubtful experiment?

Ross Finnie: I regret to advise John Farquhar Munro that that is not quite the case. The board has not withdrawn its advice to me. There is clearly a public dispute between members of SNH and its board, which is not in my domain. I have not received a withdrawal of its scientific advice; therefore it does not alter my position.

Alex Johnstone (North-East Scotland) (Con): Does the minister remember that we last heard a full debate on this subject on 23 March, when we debated GM science? That debate took place in the wake of the announcement of GM crop field trials in Aberdeenshire. He may remember that during that debate there was widespread support for the motion, which included—I notice on the list that I have in front of me—support from Maureen Macmillan and John Farquhar Munro. Does he acknowledge that in other chambers there has been a sudden change of heart on this issue? Does he agree that there is, in the fact that many of these members were willing to support crop trials in Aberdeenshire but speak out in this chamber against crop trials on the Black Isle, an element of the most cynical hypocrisy?

Ross Finnie: I have to say that Alex Johnstone is getting more like Geoffrey Howe every day. That kind of question is very much like being savaged by a dead sheep. I do not think that Alex Johnstone is reading or listening to what people are saying. The biggest single anxiety arising from this process is, without any doubt, the absence of a statutory framework for public consultation. It does not exist. I do not think that members would expect me, as a minister, to act unlawfully. We have every sympathy, in that there is all sorts of misleading and unhelpful information as to the nature of those trials. For example, the trials are not to test safety in terms of public health or the environment; they are to test biodiversity in the locality of the trial site. If that public information were more widely available, I think that many of the concerns would dissipate.

Richard Lochhead (North-East Scotland) (SNP): I appreciate that the issue of GM crop trials is difficult for Ross Finnie. After all, Charles Kennedy, his UK leader, is against the trials and Ross Finnie here in Edinburgh is for the trials. John Farquhar Munro in the Highlands is taking on board local concerns, while Nora Radcliffe in the north-east of Scotland is ignoring local concerns.

Can the minister tell us exactly what Liberal Democrat policy is on consultation with local communities? Will he undertake to come to Daviot in Gordon in the north-east of Scotland, and to the Highlands, to appear in person at a public meeting and hear local concerns for the first time?

Ross Finnie: There are two matters of substance in this issue, which both John Farquhar Munro and Charles Kennedy have raised. The first matter, of paramount importance, is that of public health and the possible danger to environmental safety. Both my colleagues are concerned about it. I can only repeat that under no circumstances would I authorise any trial where I did not have independent advice from the Food Standards Agency and the Advisory Committee on Releases to the Environment—[Interruption.]

I have made it clear that under the legislation I do not have power to delay the trial.

The second issue is public consultation. One can hold a meeting in which one seeks to inform, but one should not dress that up as an act of consultation, in which participants have a legal means of influencing the decision under the regulations. I am willing to hold public information meetings.

As Richard Lochhead is well aware, John Farquhar Munro and I have met the convener of the Highland Council and others. It was at that meeting that we agreed the timetable for such public meetings.

Liquid Petroleum Gas (Conversion Grants)

8. Fergus Ewing (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP): To ask the Scottish Executive how many grants have been paid to convert motor vehicles to use liquid petroleum gas and whether it has set or will set a target for the number of such grants which are to be paid in future. (S1O-2178)

The Deputy Minister for Highlands and Islands and Gaelic (Mr Alasdair Morrison): Since 1997, 390 vehicles have been converted in Scotland with the assistance of grant under the Energy Saving Trust's powershift scheme. No numerical target is set for grants as the amount that is payable is dependent on the emission reductions that are achieved by the type of vehicle that is converted and the cost of each conversion.

Fergus Ewing: Does the minister agree that liquid petroleum gas is a matter of complete irrelevance for the overwhelming majority of motorists in the Highlands and Islands, who pay the highest fuel tax in the world? Now that we are approaching the £4 gallon and the £1 billion millennium dome, can new Labour and its Liberal colleagues say whether they will take or promote any action to end the discrimination against motorists in the Highlands and Islands? If so, in which millennium?

Mr Morrison: Whenever I hear Fergus Ewing talking about fuel, I am inclined to stand up and yawn, but I suspect that that is not an acceptable response.

The Highlands is now the place where one can access the cheapest fuel in the United Kingdom. I am disappointed that Mr Ewing cannot welcome a fantastic initiative by the UK Government, the Scottish Executive and the oil companies. I wish that he had the common sense of another Opposition politician, Mary Scanlon, who had the good decency to welcome the initiative and recognise its merits. I wish that Mr Ewing had employed a new speechwriter over the summer.

The Presiding Officer: The question is about LPG grants, and I call Rhoda Grant.

Rhoda Grant (Highlands and Islands) (Lab): Can the minister give an assurance that the Scottish Tourist Board will highlight the availability of LPG throughout the Highlands and Islands? Given that many European motorists use dual-fuel cars, that could give a much-needed boost to tourism in the area.

Mr Morrison: Mrs Grant raises a very important point. Two weeks ago at the opening of the first station in the Highlands, in Evanton, I was struck by the fact that it had sold 2,000 litres of fuel in two weeks without any pre-publicity or advertising. We have to appreciate that many motorists across the EU use bi-fuel cars. For example, about 1 million motorists in Italy, and 500,000 in the Netherlands, which are both important tourism markets for Scotland, use such cars. Sarah Boyack made that point to the Scottish Tourist Board at a meeting earlier this week, and I will be happy to reinforce that message next week when I discuss various matters with Lord Gordon, the chairman of the Scottish Tourist Board.

Water (Fluoridation)

9. Robin Harper (Lothians) (Green): To ask the Scottish Executive whether it intends to proceed with adding fluoride to Scotland's drinking water supplies and what the exact status is of any preparations for such fluoridation. (S1O-2201)

The Minister for Health and Community Care (Susan Deacon): The Executive's programme for government promised a widespread public consultation on fluoridation as part of a wider package of measures to improve dental and oral health. That remains our position. Arrangements for the consultation will be announced in due course.

Robin Harper: Will the minister concede that tooth decay in children is mainly the result of poverty, poor diet and poor dental care and that fluoridating drinking water will only cover up those rather more fundamental problems? Will she pay attention to bullet point 3 on page 7 of "An Action Plan for Dental Services in Scotland"? Before charging ahead with fluoridation, will she consider properly cheaper and more effective alternatives, such as breakfast clubs, a huge expansion of the programme of providing free toothbrushes and toothpaste to children and ensuring access to fresh fruit and vegetables?

Susan Deacon: I am pleased to confirm that we have already moved forward on the examples that Robin Harper highlights. Only a few weeks ago, I announced our proposals—through the additional investment that we have allocated for improving health and taking forward our public health programme—for moving towards a massive expansion of the number of breakfast clubs in Scotland and to provide free toothbrushes and toothpaste to more than 100,000 Scottish children by 2001.

It is important to acknowledge that we recognise also that action across a broad range of fronts is required if we are to improve Scotland's dental health record. I hope that this is an area in which we can get agreement across parties, because I do not think that we disagree on the objective.

Let me also take this opportunity to remind members what we must tackle. More than 60 per cent of three-year-olds in disadvantaged areas of Scotland have experienced dental decay. Children in our poorest areas have three to four times the amount of dental decay of their counterparts in the most affluent areas. I am determined that we should take action right across the board to do something about that. I hope that colleagues will join me.

Mr Andy Kerr (East Kilbride) (Lab): Given that more than half of five-year-olds still have signs of dental disease and that 18 per cent of adults have no teeth, does the minister agree that improving children's dental health is an absolute priority? Will she reassure me that the Executive is making progress towards its target of 60 per cent of five-year-olds having no dental disease by 2010?

Susan Deacon: The measures to which I alluded a moment ago are evidence of the fact that we are committed to working actively towards that target. I am pleased by the constructive discussions that we have had with the British Dental Association and others to ensure that we move forward. Of course, there must be measures to improve dental and oral health, but we must also have measures to improve our children's diet. We are working across all of those fronts and will continue to do so.

Mr Brian Monteith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con): Does the minister agree that fluoridation of Scotland's water supplies would be mass medication without consent, which would severely violate civil liberties and individual choice and would be an example of the worst excesses of the nanny state that new Labour epitomises?

Susan Deacon: The short answer is no. However, I appreciate that people have different and very strongly held views on the issue, which is precisely why the Executive is committed to moving forward on the basis of consultation. That is the basis of the discussions that we have had in recent months with the BDA and others.

I have examined the evidence closely and believe that there is very strong evidence to suggest that fluoridation can have a dramatic impact on the health of our children's teeth. I repeat, however, that this is a matter to be decided on a cross-party basis in consultation with people throughout Scotland. That is why it is important that we have a well-informed and mature debate on the issue and I hope that Brian Monteith will raise his game in that respect in the months ahead.

National Health Service

10. Shona Robison (North-East Scotland) (SNP): To ask the Scottish Executive why the national health service waiting lists in Tayside have risen by over 35 per cent during the past 12 months. (S1O-2176)

The Minister for Health and Community Care (Susan Deacon): The waiting list increase in Tayside has been due primarily to the effect of winter pressures last year and shortages of staff in specific specialties. Today, a performance management team from the health department is meeting the NHS in Tayside to examine the plans for investment and action to reduce waiting in the months ahead.

Shona Robison: Today, I received a letter from Derek Maclean, the medical director of Tayside University Hospitals NHS Trust, which states:

"I share your concerns over funding pressures and possible impacts on future waiting lists."

Given the concerns that are being expressed by the medical profession, will the minister guarantee that the cutbacks resulting from the £14 million deficit will not lead to further increases in waiting lists in Tayside and will she further agree to allow the trust—as a bare minimum—an additional year in which to try to pay off the deficit in Tayside?

Susan Deacon: I repeat my earlier point—and will keep repeating it until members recognise the facts of the situation—that substantial increased investment has gone into Tayside, as it has into other parts of the NHS. It is important that that increased investment is effectively managed. Although we have already taken action by working with local trusts to ensure that that happens, we must ensure that local management in Tayside manages resources effectively to protect and improve services for people throughout the region. We will continue to do that.

Mr John McAllion (Dundee East) (Lab): Common sense suggests that having to reduce a £14 million deficit over two years must affect the trust's ability to deliver services and reduce waiting lists. However, does the minister accept that there is a national and a local responsibility for that deficit, because the management executive in Edinburgh approved the use of one-off capital receipts to fund recurring expenditure that was not included in the revenue budget of Tayside University Hospitals NHS Trust?

Furthermore, has not the time come to tackle the problem that is at the root of the trouble in Tayside, which is the problem of trying to run a major teaching hospital such as Ninewells on the basis of a population of only 400,000? If acute services in Scotland are being delivered through a network of four or five big teaching hospitals throughout the country, why do we need 15 health boards and why do not those health boards match the delivery of acute services across the country?

Susan Deacon: As ever, John McAllion raises a challenging range of issues, and I will do my best in the couple of minutes that are available to address each of them in turn.

First, in the report that was published by the task force that has examined the NHS in Tayside, there were a number of comments about systems within the health department. I am pleased to say that action is being taken in that respect. Changes to the structure of the department and in its personnel have been made and should be reflected in national improvements in performance management in the months ahead.

There was a practice—which was widespread in the NHS in Scotland under the Tories and the internal market—in which substantial sums of money were transferred from capital into revenue to the detriment of long-term investment in the service. We have changed the rules on that this year for the first time so that capital investment is precisely that and we reinvest in building the service.

On the wider questions that were raised by John McAllion, a core part of our agenda for the modernisation of the NHS in Scotland—as I set out in the debate on the last day before the recess—is to examine the structure, systems and governance of the NHS in Scotland to ensure that it is as effective as possible in the years to come. We will develop that debate in the months ahead.

Roads (A96)

11. Nora Radcliffe (Gordon) (LD): To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to improve road safety on the A96 between Inverurie and Huntly in the light of the five fatalities that have occurred on that stretch of road in recent weeks. (S1O-2166)

The Minister for Transport and the Environment (Sarah Boyack): As part of an on-going programme of works to improve safety on the A96 trunk road, two schemes between Inverurie and Huntly are being progressed.

A junction improvement scheme at Slioch crossroads will be constructed this year at an estimated cost of £370,000. In addition, it is anticipated that construction work on the Newtongarry climbing lane scheme will commence in spring 2001, at an estimated cost of £3 million.

The Scottish Executive is also preparing the Coachford alignment improvement and climbing lane scheme, which is approximately five miles north of Huntly, at an estimated cost of £3.5 million. It is expected that draft orders will be published in the summer of 2001 and—subject to the completion of the statutory procedures—construction should start in 2002.

Nora Radcliffe: Although those measures to improve the A96 are welcome, does the minister agree that they are only interim measures and that a major arterial route such as the A96 should be dual carriageway along its entire length?

Sarah Boyack: Although that has been considered, traffic flows meant that it was not justified as a priority at the time. However, I can assure Nora Radcliffe that we will continue to identify safety improvement schemes and programme them into the system. We will also review the experiences of last month—the accidents on that stretch of road—and will include the results of that review in our future programme of works.

Brian Adam (North-East Scotland) (SNP): How many more sets of flowers at the side of the road will I have to see before the minister starts taking action on some of the roads in the north-east? Although I welcome the fact that there will be some improvements on the A96, will she conduct a safety audit on the road? Furthermore, will she publish the contents of that audit, which she failed to do with the safety audit of the A90?

Sarah Boyack: The purpose of identifying safety audits is to analyse the opportunities to improve stretches of trunk roads. That is an opportunity to make sure that we tackle those roads for the future. As I outlined in my answer to Nora Radcliffe, we are making significant improvements to the A96 and will continue to do so.

First Minister's Question Time

scottish executive

Cabinet (Meetings)

1. Mr Alex Salmond (Banff and Buchan) (SNP): To ask the First Minister what issues were discussed at the last meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S1F-504)

The First Minister (Donald Dewar): It is as though I had never been away. The Cabinet discussed several matters of significance to the Executive and to the people of Scotland.

Mr Salmond: I thought that the discussion might have been on education, education, education.

Is the First Minister aware of the terms of section 9 of the Education (Scotland) Act 1996? That section states that the Secretary of State for Scotland, whose responsibilities in this regard lie now with the Minister for Children and Education,

"may, after consultation with SQA, give SQA directions of a general or specific character with regard to the discharge of its functions and it shall be the duty of SQA to comply with such directions."

Given that that is in the act, why did the Minister for Children and Education try to persuade us yesterday that he did not have those powers?

The First Minister: The advice that I received is that ministers could not use their power of direction in any way that would have the effect of the Executive taking over any of the Scottish Qualifications Authority's functions. The power of direction refers to the SQA's substantive functions as conferred by statute; devising, accrediting and awarding qualifications and assessment. It does not apply to incidental matters such as staffing or allocation of responsibilities in the organisation. There is no way in which the SQA's functions could revert to ministers without primary legislation.

I assure Mr Salmond that the Executive is extremely interested in education, education, education. That is why—if he bothers to look at the statistics—he will see that we have more teachers in primary and secondary schools than we had a year ago, more classroom assistants, a better pupil to teacher ratio and a much more healthy educational outlook.

Mr Salmond: I noticed that the First Minister moved quickly away from discussing what is in the act. The act refers to the discharge of the SQA's functions and the power of compliance that is given to the minister. Given that, why did Mr Galbraith say the following to Mr Harper yesterday?

"As I think I explained, and as will now be clear to everyone, I have absolutely no powers to instruct the SQA to do anything."—[Official Report, 6 September 2000; Vol 8, c 30.]

Is that statement true or false, given what is in the act?

The First Minister: I have made that clear. Mr Salmond will appreciate the distinction between a departmental agency and a non-departmental public body. Of course we have a right in statute to lay down the terms and conditions in the terms of the—[Interruption.] It would help if Nicola Sturgeon would stop shouting. At times, the Scot Nat benches sound like a cliff of seagulls, which does not help the standard of debate.

Of course there is a power to lay down directions with regard to the objectives of the organisation and its task. However, it is an arm's-length body—it employs its own staff, it controls its own staff and we do not have the power to walk through the door and take over. It is important to recognise that.

The first thing that matters at this point is not a discussion about textual legal interpretation between Mr Salmond and myself—neither of us is expert in the matter. The first priority is to make sure that we get the matter put right. We must get the system in good order and in a situation in which we can tell parents, pupils and teachers that there will be no repeat of the difficulties that we have seen in the past few months. That is what Sam Galbraith is making sure of and I strongly support it.

Mr Salmond: As an explanation for Mr Galbraith telling us yesterday that he did not have those powers, I offer the fact that he was trying to shift the entire responsibility and blame onto the Scottish Qualifications Authority.

Will the First Minister accept what every parent, teacher and student in Scotland knows; that the man who has presided over this educational disaster should take responsibility for it?

Will the First Minister, with his considerable parliamentary experience, accept that an education minister who has been caught so blatantly dissembling to Parliament should not be in office at 5 o'clock this afternoon?

The First Minister: No, I absolutely reject the charge of dissembling to Parliament and I hope that Alex Salmond will regret it when he starts to think in retrospect about this particular exchange.

I repeat: the job of the chamber and of everyone in it is to ensure that we get the matter right and that we achieve a secure future for the pupils, teachers and parents in the Scottish educational system. I want the inquiries—set up by the Education, Culture and Sport Committee and other committees—to be carried through with thoroughness, integrity and balance. I hope that those inquiries analyse and inform and illuminate the chamber.

I am concerned about some of the things that have been said—Nicola Sturgeon provides an example. She stated:

"Through the education committee's inquiry, his role and culpability will be plain for all to see, and after that inquiry, there will only be one possible outcome - Sam Galbraith's removal from office."

I ask Mr Salmond to consider this: would not it be better to ask Ms Sturgeon to step down from the committee? If it were any sort of independent tribunal, she would certainly be barred from taking part on the ground of evincing malice.

Scottish Cabinet

2. David McLetchie (Lothians) (Con): To ask the First Minister whether he has any plans to reshuffle his Cabinet. (S1F-500)

The First Minister (Donald Dewar): No.

The Deputy Minister for Local Government (Mr Frank McAveety): You're no getting in, David.

David McLetchie: I can assure Mr McAveety that it would be a substantial improvement if I did.

Many candidates come to mind for a change of a position and Mr Galbraith is obviously among them, given the evidence of the past day or two.

I wish to pick up on a couple of the points that were raised initially by Mr Salmond, in particular the business about dissembling or misleading Parliament. Yesterday, Mr Galbraith was asked by Mrs Smith about his powers in relation to the Scottish Qualifications Authority. In answering, he omitted to mention that he has wide-ranging powers of direction, which are of a

"general or specific character with regard to the discharge"

of the functions of the SQA.

I put it to the First Minister that such convenient paraphrasing was misleading to Parliament and that that should be corrected by the Minister for Children and Education. The minister should stop hiding behind semantic distinctions between an instruction on the one hand and a wide-ranging power of direction on the other.

The First Minister: That is not the information and advice that I have been given. I put it in those terms because I do not pretend to be a constitutional lawyer.

I repeat to Mr McLetchie the point that I made to him earlier: that there is clearly a power to lay down in statute the aims, objectives and remit of the SQA. The point of the authority is that it is an arm's-length organisation. That is the point of a non-departmental public body, as distinct from a public body that has some sort of remit that lies within the Executive itself, or a next-steps agency. There is a gradation and the authority is, as a non-departmental public body, at the far edge of it.

I know that it is convenient to argue—I understand this—that we could just ignore the statutory basis of the organisation and that we could ignore the rules. However, if we had done so, we would have been in considerable difficulties, and I hope that Mr McLetchie will consider that carefully. It is an interesting area that will have to be considered by Mr McLeish and Mr Galbraith—no doubt many other people will want to help them—when they examine the review of the relationships between the Executive and that non-departmental public body.

It is a serious issue, because there have always been seen to be real advantages in independence of action and impartiality and in removing relevant matters from direct political control. I do not think that Mr McLetchie in particular—if I may say so, given the political traditions from which he comes—should simply ignore that and sweep the matter to one side.

David McLetchie: It is not a question of ignoring the matter; it is a question of interpretation of the powers that are available to ministers. I think that the First Minister will acknowledge that I would never endorse breaking of the law by any representative of the Scottish Executive in his or her ministerial capacity.

Will the First Minister confirm for the record that no action could have been taken by the Scottish ministers in exercising their powers under section 9 of the Education (Scotland) Act 1996 which would have corrected the situation that existed until 13 August? Will he confirm that there is no action that could have been taken by Scottish ministers in exercising their statutory powers that Mr Galbraith omitted to take?

The First Minister: If Mr McLetchie follows closely—as I am sure he will—the investigations of the committee of inquiry, he will discover that a great deal of action was taken in terms of the advice that was offered, continuous contact and the efforts that were made to unscramble an increasingly difficult situation. It would be sensible to wait until the story has been told—until it has unfolded and has been investigated with, I hope, the kind of impartiality that the chamber expects.

I hope also that Mr McLetchie will take pleasure—as I do—in the figures that Sam Galbraith announced yesterday, which show that 23,694 Scottish students have definitely been allocated university places. That is 2.6 per cent more than had been accepted at the same stage in the process last year, and the figure is well above the much smaller increase in the number of English acceptances.

Drugs

3. Ms Margaret Curran (Glasgow Baillieston) (Lab): To ask the First Minister what measures are being taken to ensure that Scotland works together with the rest of the United Kingdom in tackling drug trafficking and drug dealers. (S1F-514)

On behalf of my Labour colleagues, I welcome the First Minister back to question time.

The First Minister (Donald Dewar): I thank Margaret Curran for her welcome. It is with mixed feelings that I find myself standing here, but I am looking forward to the future.

There is an enormous amount of co-operation across and between the agencies north and south of the border. The Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency is well placed to co-ordinate its activities with those of the UK law enforcement agencies, including the National Criminal Intelligence Service and HM Customs and Excise.

Ms Curran: I thank the First Minister for that reply and welcome the determination behind those concerted efforts.

Does he agree that the most effective way in which to pursue the drug dealers who so ruthlessly exploit our communities—as is graphically demonstrated in my constituency in the east end of Glasgow—is to use assertively the powers of Parliament and to work in partnership and constructively across borders as a devolved Scotland within the framework of the United Kingdom?

The First Minister: Drug dealers do not respect national or administrative boundaries—it is important to remember that. I do not want to end with a flurry of statistics, but there is no doubt that the work of the police has been impressive. Between 1990 and 1998, seizures of drugs rose from 5,900 to 27,000 cases. That reflects increasing efficiency, but sadly, it also probably charts the increasing difficulties, danger and spread of the misuse of drugs. I agree that we will have to make our contribution and learn from other places. There is much talk about the seizure of assets and we are trying to find the right way to hit the pockets of the people who have been dealing drugs. Of course, we are also leading the way on the enforcement side with the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency, which the Prime Minister visited the other day.

Mr Keith Raffan (Mid Scotland and Fife) (LD): What assurance can the First Minister give to the chief constable and deputy chief constable from different Scottish police forces who, in meetings with me, have questioned the need for the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency and the difference that it will make? They have expressed concern that they might lose some of their senior drugs officers and feel that the money that is being spent on the SDEA would be better spent on cutting demand, through further increased provision for treatment, rehabilitation and aftercare.

The First Minister: I understand that local people will often feel that way. However, I believe that the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency has an important role to play. It will bring in 100 new police officers, who will develop special expertise in dealing with sophisticated drug dealers. It has been regarded widely as a helpful and progressive development in the enforcement field.

Keith Raffan will know that in May, I think, £8.9 million of additional money was allocated to police forces and it is expected that that will mean an additional 300 police officers. That will, I hope, help. We keep the situation under review always and I look forward to being able to help the police to maintain a really efficient service in this area.

We have been talking about enforcement, which takes about 45 per cent of the budget. We spend about 55 per cent on treatment and it is very important that we do not forget how vital preventive measures are in trying to help people who are the victims of drugs as certainly as are those who suffer from drug users' predations.

Less Favoured Areas Scheme

4. George Lyon (Argyll and Bute) (LD): To ask the First Minister how the Executive will ensure that farmers and crofters in the Highlands and Islands get an adequate level of compensation for high transport, fuel and ferry costs under the new less favoured areas scheme. (S1F-513)

The First Minister (Donald Dewar): The immediate priority is to secure early European Commission agreement to Scotland's rural development plan. That will enable LFA payments to be made to Scotland's farmers and crofters next March. Where the switch from headage to area payments results in claimants receiving less than they will this year, individuals are guaranteed payments that are equal to at least 90 per cent of the current year's support.

George Lyon: Thank you. Is the First Minister aware that the new less favoured areas scheme is designed to compensate farmers and crofters for permanent and severe climatic and geographical disadvantage? That means compensation for the high transport and fuel costs experienced by farmers in the Highlands and Islands, which would put them on the same competitive playing field as their counterparts in central and lowland Scotland. The First Minister should be aware that farmers in Kintyre made a comparison between identical farms in Kintyre and in Lanarkshire. The difference per year in Kintyre because of extra costs was £8,000. I ask for the First Minister's assurance that the new scheme will take those extra costs into consideration and deal with it when it is finalised.

The First Minister: As George Lyon of all people knows—with his background and the offices he has held—we cannot alter arbitrarily payments that are made under the auspices of the European Union, even if we were so minded. It is important that we have a Government that has shown, during the past two or three years of crisis, that it is prepared to release substantial sums of money to help agriculture. It has also—with the rural transport fund, the public transport fund, vehicle excise duty remissions and the extent to which livestock exports from Orkney and Shetland are helped by a rebate—tried to tackle the other problems that people in rural areas face. A whole range of measures are being undertaken. Of course we are always under pressure—and rightly so—to do more and to do better, but we will do everything we can to maintain the industry. We have made that clear repeatedly and, more important, we have put our money where our mouth is.

Mr Jamie McGrigor (Highlands and Islands) (Con): Is the First Minister aware of the scale of the collapse of hill-farming and crofting incomes since his party came to power? What comfort can he give to crofters and farmers in the Highlands and Islands that the less favoured areas scheme will be enough to sustain agriculture in the hills in future?

The First Minister: I do not know where Mr McGrigor farms or how he farms—

The Deputy Minister for Rural Affairs (Mr John Home Robertson): Or on what planet.

The First Minister: Perhaps fortunately, I did not catch that agricultural remark from another farmer.

Of course we understand that it has been bad, that it has been tough and that there has been a substantial drop in farm incomes. I am glad to say that conditions seem to have improved in the beef sector. There has undoubtedly been a revival in lamb prices. I think it is also fair to say, although I look to greater experts than myself, that there has been some recovery in pork prices as well, which has helped the very hard-pressed pig industry.

I do not think anyone of fair mind would deny that we have been able to supplement substantially the £0.5 billion European support payments for farmers in Scotland. I do not apologise for that—we were glad to do it—but the real task now, in which Ross Finnie is playing a distinguished role with excellent co-operation from the National Farmers Union of Scotland, is to try to see how we can move to a sustainable rural economy that has farming at its heart.

It will be not easy to do that, but we must do it. We cannot continue indefinitely on the present basis.

Local Government (Pay)

5. Mr Kenneth Gibson (Glasgow) (SNP): To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Executive is taking to resolve the local government pay dispute. (S1F-498)

The First Minister (Donald Dewar): Local authority pay is, of course, a matter for the local authorities and the unions to resolve. That is undoubtedly true. The Executive is not represented in the negotiations. Obviously, we have an interest in those negotiations—everyone has—but we will have to wait until a negotiated settlement emerges.

Mr Gibson: Is the First Minister aware that the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities has stated categorically that the much vaunted extra resources that his Government has allocated to local authorities this year do not even cover new burdens? Is he also aware that Scottish local government employees have had pay rises below the rate of inflation for six of the past seven years and now earn approximately 17 per cent less than their counterparts south of the border? Does he believe that local government employees in Scotland should earn 17 per cent less than their counterparts in England and Wales? If not—as he is not going to put in any extra resources from his own budget—does he believe that council tax payers should meet the costs of additional pay rises for local government workers? I want a direct answer. Are workers in Scotland worth less than those south of the border? Should council tax payers pay more?

The First Minister: Demanding direct answers or shouting, in a rather ludicrous fashion, "Yes or no!" never leads to a great advantage. Mr Gibson is guilty of both on occasions.

This is a matter for negotiation. I have no doubt that Mr Gibson has been looking, as I have, at the Unison material that has been issued in connection with the dispute. He will have seen that Unison is making the point—very powerfully—that Government-supported expenditure to local authorities was 3.6 per cent. It suggests that the settlement last year and the promised settlements above the rate of inflation over the next two years leave proper room for negotiations between the parties. That is the traditional way in which such matters are settled.

We will have to wait to see what emerges from the 2000 spending review. If Mr Gibson is pledging—and I think that he is a front-bench spokesman—that the SNP will simply meet the bill for any settlement that is negotiated, he is not in the world of practical government.

Tommy Sheridan (Glasgow) (SSP): Does the First Minister recall his position of seven years ago, when the Tory Administration introduced responsibility for local government pay as a function of the central Government settlement? I recall that his party opposed that move. Did the First Minister oppose that move seven years ago?

In the Sunday Mail last Sunday, it was reported that nursery nurses who had worked for 32 years are now earning £12,000. Does the First Minister think that Unison members are justified in taking industrial action?

The First Minister: I thought that Mr Sheridan was going to tell me what my views were seven years ago and I was going to be very flattered that he had followed my career in such detail. I believe strongly that the settlement of pay disputes is a matter for negotiation between the employers and those who represent the workers. That is the simple way and the best way of doing it. There are, of course, exceptions—for the teachers we have the pay review body.

There is a legitimate argument over whether that idea should be expanded. However, that is not the position just now. We will try to do all we can to create economic circumstances that allow the negotiations to take place in a reasonable atmosphere. However, those negotiations must be a matter for agreement between the sides. It cannot be a matter of our simply agreeing to underwrite the gap and saying that we will pay for the gap, whatever it is.

Dorothy-Grace Elder (Glasgow) (SNP): Does the First Minister accept the disgraceful principle that council workers in Scotland are paid something like £17 a week less than their council worker counterparts in England? Is he telling me that we in Scotland cannot afford even to pay our public authority workers a living wage while £1,000 million has been squandered in Greenwich on the symbol of Mr Blair's megalomania—that dreadful dome?

The First Minister: I will not swap insults with Dorothy-Grace Elder about megalomania. I think that she has me well beaten on the Richter scale.

Last year the local government settlement was higher in Scotland than in England. No doubt we would have been rather annoyed if there had been protests about that. Of course I want good wage rates in Scotland and I want negotiations conducted speedily to produce results that are accepted by both sides as fair. However, if Dorothy-Grace Elder is inviting me to endorse the principle that every time there is a stand-off we should come in rattling the money bags, I cannot do that.

The Presiding Officer: That concludes question time.

Michael Russell (South of Scotland) (SNP): On a point of order, Presiding Officer. There appears to be a conflict between what we have just heard in question time and what the Minister for Children and Education said at column 30 of yesterday's Official Report. I ask for your advice on what procedure should be followed by the chamber if a minister appears to have misled it. I think that it is appropriate to ask you for that advice.

The Presiding Officer: That is certainly not a point of order, but I am always willing to give advice. You will simply have to continue the argument.

Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Bill

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): We now move to the debate on motion S1M-1136, in the name of Jim Wallace, which seeks agreement that the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Bill be passed. I invite those who would like to take part in this debate to press their request-to-speak buttons now.

15:36

The Deputy First Minister and Minister for Justice (Mr Jim Wallace): The Parliament has considered a very important piece of legislation at all its stages, particularly in committee at stage 2. I am glad that the constructive examination to which Parliament has subjected the bill during its various stages has countered some of the misleading media coverage of what the bill entails.

For the avoidance of doubt, I will make clear again what the bill is about. It places on a statutory footing the investigative powers currently used by the police and other agencies, carefully regulating their use and offering safeguards to the public. The bill underlines the Executive's commitment to a secure Scotland—a Scotland where individuals and communities are free from crime and the fear of crime—while at the same time furthering our commitment to an open and fair society.

This legislation will protect Scottish citizens. The bill safeguards the use of valuable techniques already used by public authorities for the security and protection of our community. Unfortunately, modern Scotland has modern criminals. As Gordon Jackson said this morning, there are a lot of bad people out there. As he also pointed out, they are sophisticated bad people, using sophisticated criminal methods. Often surveillance techniques and the use of informants or undercover police officers offer the only realistic means of successfully tackling serious crime. The Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Bill will play a vital role in safeguarding the use of those important techniques.

It is important just for a moment to reflect on the types of crime that the police are dealing with here: crimes such as drug trafficking, which was mentioned at question time, extortion rackets and murder. As I said in the stage 1 debate, surveillance last year played a key role in 109 arrests by Scottish police forces, 99 of which related to drug trafficking. Surveillance continues to play an important role in police operations. Surveillance operations have led to Scottish police forces and the Scottish Crime Squad making a total of 147 arrests so far this year, 119 of which were for drug offences.

Just as important, the bill represents a significant step forward in the protection of civil liberties and human rights. It will ensure that the use of covert surveillance techniques is compatible with the European convention on human rights. In doing so, it will for the first time provide a legislative framework for the use of surveillance techniques in Scotland. It will protect Scottish citizens' rights to respect for their private and family life, their home and their correspondence.

Despite what some of the more lurid newspaper articles have suggested, the bill is not a statutory embodiment of Big Brother—far from it. It will ensure that surveillance techniques are used only for specific and necessary reasons, that they are proportionate to the criminal activity in question and that they are properly authorised. Furthermore, for the first time, the use of such techniques will be subject to independent oversight and there will be access to a tribunal for those who believe that they have wrongly been the subject of investigation.

As members will be aware, the bill is the Scottish counterpart to the UK Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000. There are clear operational advantages in having similar regimes north and south of the border. The similarity between part II of the United Kingdom act and the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Bill is no coincidence. There are occasions on which a similar approach throughout the United Kingdom is both sensible and practical—this is such an occasion.

As we know, criminals pay no heed to national borders. Therefore, it is important that the UK act and the Scottish bill fit together in order to provide a UK-wide framework. We can be sure that criminals would be quick to utilise any gaps or loopholes in the legislation. The Home Office and the Scottish Executive have worked closely to co-ordinate and formulate joint policies in this respect. Those policies reflect Scottish interests as well as those of England and Wales.

As well as ensuring compatibility between the UK act and the Scottish bill, we had to resolve certain complex legal issues of legislative competence. As a result, the bill was delayed and had to proceed through Parliament quickly for it to be in force in time for the full commencement on 2 October this year of the Human Rights Act 1998.

I record my thanks to Roseanna Cunningham as convener of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee and to the other members of the committee. Today and during stage 2—Angus MacKay advises me—the committee members have shown considerable interest in and knowledge of the matters under discussion. They have helped to ensure that the bill has proceeded in such a way as to meet the requirements and hopes that we hold for it. I thank the committee clerks and officials for their co-operation in reacting to short deadlines. I realise that, at times, the bill has diverted the Justice and Home Affairs Committee from its own business and I would like to thank everyone involved for their patience.

I must also express my gratitude to my colleague Angus MacKay. My role as Deputy First Minister, particularly during the absence of the First Minister, meant that I was unable to lead the bill through all its parliamentary stages. I thank Angus MacKay for the work that he has done in that respect.

I would also like to thank the officials in the justice department, who have done a considerable amount of work—not least in liaising with the Home Office—to ensure that the bill meets the pan-United Kingdom approach needed to ensure its effectiveness.

The Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Bill is an important piece of legislation. It protects the safety of Scotland's citizens as well as their freedom and privacy. It strikes the proper balance between crime prevention and safeguarding the rights of individuals.

I move,

That the Parliament agrees that the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Bill be passed.

15:43

Michael Matheson (Central Scotland) (SNP): As a member of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, I would like to begin by thanking the clerks for their tremendous efforts in assisting the committee and in ensuring that the bill proceeded on time.

I have some concerns about the way in which the bill was rushed through Parliament, as that limited the amount of time that we had to consider various of its provisions. As the Deputy First Minister has said, the need for the rush was to ensure that the legislation was in place for 2 October. However, several members have raised concerns about the timetable. During the stage 1 debate, Robin Harper told us that several organisations were unable to give evidence to the committee because the time scale for evidence taking was too short to allow them to be fitted in. That is a matter of regret.

When the bill was first introduced, like many members I was rather suspicious of it. I am on record as saying that any bill that has the abbreviation "RIP" should be treated with suspicion—particularly when it deals with surveillance. However, as the Deputy First Minister has outlined, the intention of the bill is to achieve a balance between civil rights, human rights and the ability to carry out surveillance. The bill achieves that to some extent, although I have reservations about several areas.

Before I started to consider the bill, I had no knowledge of the process of undertaking surveillance. I have been on a steep learning curve over the past couple of months, particularly in relation to how the legislation applies to the surveillance world. I am not sure whether that has reduced or heightened my suspicion of the way in which surveillance is undertaken. I regret that it may be the latter.

The Deputy First Minister mentioned the constructive manner in which members of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee and the political parties acted in dealing with the bill to ensure that it was passed on time. The SNP has acted constructively in ensuring that the bill passes with the best scrutiny possible within the limited time that we have had. The Executive has not experienced the same problems that its counterparts in Westminster did during the passage of the UK Regulation of Investigatory Powers Bill.

There is general recognition that this bill regulates an area that was formerly unregulated. That is to be welcomed. As I outlined to the minister, there are concerns about aspects of the bill. I regret that amendment 8, moved by Christine Grahame, was not accepted. At some point in the future, there is likely to be a case against the bill regarding compliance with the European convention on human rights. Time will tell.

As I said, the SNP supports the bill. We do so in the spirit of creating a more open and accountable society.

15:47

Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh (Central Scotland) (Con): The Conservative position on the bill has not altered greatly over the summer months. Once again, I thank the convener of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, Roseanna Cunningham, for her stewardship of the evidence presented to the committee, and of course I thank our marvellous clerking team, the hardest worked in the Parliament.

The introduction of statutory guidance on the policing of investigatory powers has received cross-party backing. Today, we have stated our position on many of the issues of contention, particularly those involving the police. Let me restate it: as Conservatives, we are prepared to give the police whatever they require to do the job responsibly. There was a need to introduce the bill to ensure a consistent statutory regime throughout the United Kingdom in relation to investigatory powers when ECHR becomes applicable next month. Scotland's position will be decided today. We recognise that a commonsense approach to the complex issue of organised crime, which recognises few if any borders, is required and that, as part of a United Kingdom, Scotland must play its part in the fight against such activity. We must focus our attention on the organised networks of serious criminals if we are to make a difference in our communities.

Organised crime continues to flood our streets with drugs, challenging the ability of our police to keep order. Any regulation of investigatory powers must therefore put the right of the individual and society to be free from fear of intimidation and drugs before the rights of any individual involved in illegally disrupting lives through the pursuit of organised criminal activity.

Police representatives want the bill in order to ensure compliance with ECHR. In implementing the bill, we should, as far as possible, eliminate the imposition on the police of time constraints that do not currently exist. After all, we must not inhibit their ability to act quickly on our behalf, particularly in this information technology age. Criminals have been quick off the mark in using computer technology to their advantage and, as many members who have served in a variety of legal capacities will know, computers can do an awful lot in the time that it takes to get a warrant signed.

We must all ensure that, when time is of the essence, ordinary investigating officers are empowered to conduct their inquiries as they see fit, without reference to senior officers; otherwise, situations may arise where the criminals are home and hosed by the time an investigating officer has tracked down a senior officer to obtain authority to approve covert surveillance.

Covert activities are highly expensive and the police will not be enter into them lightly. Parliament need not fear that the bill will provide the police with greater scope to undertake costly surveillance. We have been assured by all those who presented evidence—including the Law Society of Scotland—that, far from increasing covert surveillance operations, the bill will restrict police activity in that field.

What we hope to clarify today for the police without any dubiety is a definition of what constitutes a crowd. As things stand, every time I meet other members for a cigarette at the back of the office—and one meets a very entertaining type of person there—collectively we could constitute a crowd that may cause serious concern. Rather than transferring state secrets or quantities of drugs, we exchange pleasantries and share lighter moments, some of which spilled into our consideration of the bill this morning. Who would have thought that this bill could have caused so much laughter? People will be queueing up to get on our committee soon.

Of course, the Justice and Home Affairs Committee was subject to time constraints when considering the draft bill. The Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland assured us that the legislation would not incur an additional administrative burden. I hope that, if that proves not to be the case, the Executive will be sympathetic.

Our democracy is based on a parliamentary structure that ensures that expert advice is given to parliamentarians so that amendments can be lodged to improve legislation. We are indebted to those who sought to guide our thoughts. Compliance with the European convention on human rights is desirable—the bill will be of assistance. I look forward to supporting the bill at decision time.

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Mr George Reid): In view of the significant airing of the bill this morning, I ask members to keep their remarks tight.

15:52

Scott Barrie (Dunfermline West) (Lab): I do not intend to take up too much time, as much of what needs to be said has already been said.

Although the bill is serious, I would like to pick up Lyndsay McIntosh's point about levity in the committee. My abiding memory of the stage 2 debate is Michael Matheson's admission that 10 is a large crowd for Firhill these days. However, Partick Thistle seems to have fallen on hard times, as his amendment this morning suggests that the number is down to six.

It should be remembered that the bill and the parallel UK legislation are primarily aimed at ensuring that we are ECHR compliant. However, the bill should not be passed because of that; it should be passed because it is a good thing.

The most important aspect of the bill is that it does not provide any new powers for the police to carry out surveillance on members of the public or to conduct entrapment operations. Moreover, it does not give new powers to any other public authority. It simply puts into a statutory framework what is already happening. I welcome that.

The bill attempts to bring covert surveillance out of the shadowy world that it inhabits, to create an environment where surveillance is subject to statutory regulation and to allow anyone who feels that they have been the subject of unwarranted surveillance the right of appeal to a newly created tribunal. We had extensive debate this morning on how someone who had been blissfully ignorant that they had been the subject of surveillance might try to take matters up with the tribunal.

As I said morning, I acknowledge the considerable efforts of Christine Grahame, who, over a long period, has tried to address the difficult issue of how we balance the civil liberties of our citizens with the need of the state to detect and prevent crime. However, as I also said, the more I considered the implications of the issue, the more I could accept the Executive's position, which was articulated clearly by the Deputy Minister for Justice.

I sincerely hope that the bill is ECHR compliant. Given the work that has been put in not only by members of Justice and Home Affairs Committee but by a number of other members who have taken an interest, I believe that the bill achieves what it set out to achieve: it protects the civil liberties of our citizens while ensuring that the state can carry out legitimate operations.

15:55

Euan Robson (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD): The Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Bill is an important piece of legislation—it is probably more significant than is generally realised. For the first time, there will be a statutory framework for the regulation of the powers and activities of investigatory authorities. It is the sincere hope of the Scottish Liberal Democrats that the bill is compatible with the European convention on human rights; the work of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee has gone a long way towards ensuring that it is.

I echo the tributes that have been paid to the convener of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, to members of that committee, who put a great deal of effort into scrutinising the bill and, in particular, to the clerks, without whose efforts the bill would not have progressed so effectively.

I appreciate that the bill was introduced with a challenging timetable, but it was important to get it on to the statute book before October, when the Human Rights Act 1998 comes into force.

The bill has been improved today, particularly by the removal of the catch-all power for ministers to authorise surveillance, which was an important and welcome concession by the Executive. I congratulate Michael Matheson on lodging that significant amendment.

In time, we will need to come back to this legislation—perhaps it was too ambitious to think that we would get everything right first time. I am sure that, in the course of future events, we will find some deficiencies in the bill. As was apparent in committee, I have reservations about two sections in particular.

First, I have reservations about section 26, on the saving for lawful conduct, as I fear that some people might use that provision as an excuse not to apply the act as they should. However, if that should occur in practice, we would soon find out and we could revisit that section.

Secondly, I had, and continue to have, considerable concerns about the limitations on civil liability in section 2. I understand and accept what the minister said to me in his letter, but I still suspect that the limitations imposed in section 2 make it more difficult to claim civil liability when injury or loss to a third party takes place. Ranged against an individual who may wish to make a civil claim is the apparatus of the state. In those circumstances, to restrict or limit liability in the way that has been suggested is unwise. However, I am prepared to wait and see whether there are problems when cases are brought. If there are, I hope that we will revisit section 2.

Overall, it is important that we pass the bill. It is a good piece of legislation and brings into a statutory framework what has been custom and practice for some time. If problems exist with the bill, they lie in the area of complaints and redress. The codes of practice contain sections on complaints and redress: there is a process for complaints, but precious little discussion of redress. If at all possible, Parliament should consider that area when draft orders or statutory instruments are introduced on the codes of practice.

However, I welcome the bill. I hope that the Parliament will pass it; certainly, my party will vote for it. I commend the bill to the chamber.

15:59

Gordon Jackson (Glasgow Govan) (Lab): I agree with Euan Robson that the bill is a good piece of legislation. At the risk of another bout of Justice and Home Affairs Committee members patting ourselves on the back, I will say that I think that we have done a good job on the bill. We questioned, we pushed, we queried and, I suspect, at times we annoyed. At the end of the day, we improved the bill.

From the beginning—this has been said over and again—the debate on the bill has always been about trying to strike a balance, which has not been entirely easy. I come back to what was said at stage 1. We heard evidence from Professor Alan Miller, who represents the civil liberties lobby, and from the police. Both conceded that the bill is, by and large, a good piece of legislation—that unanimity also exists in this chamber. That suggests to me that, although nothing is perfect, we have managed to strike a balance.

Like Euan Robson, I am particularly grateful to the Executive for taking out the catch-all provision. We did not like it, as it was open to abuse. We were conscious of the point that Christine Grahame was making—very well—about disclosure, and one way of trying to improve the balance was to do what the Executive did and remove the catch-all provision.

I am particularly interested that that means that we have followed a different pathway from the one followed at Westminster. In some ways, I see that as a good thing, but not because we should be trying to do things differently from Westminster for the sake of it. It is worth making it clear that, although certain matters may be agreed elsewhere, we have our own views and have insisted on acting on them. That is a good example of how the process of devolution is meant to operate and, on this occasion, has been seen to operate.

The bottom line is that the bill is not about giving draconian powers to law enforcement agencies. Some weeks ago, I read a newspaper article suggesting that it was some kind of Big Brother snooping exercise; it is the very opposite. It is taking what has happened since police surveillance operations began and saying that now is the time to put it into a proper statutory framework. It is now time to legislate and to ensure that surveillance is properly governed and controlled by security commissioners appointed by the Scottish Executive. That is a good development, as the framework will give protection to the citizen rather than draconian powers to the law enforcement agencies. The bill strikes a balance between civil liberties and the need to deal with the sort of things that the law enforcement agencies come up against. Along with almost everyone in the chamber, I would commend the bill to Parliament.

16:02

Donald Gorrie (Central Scotland) (LD): In the stage 1 debate, I made a liberal—with a small "l"—speech expressing concern about some of the civil liberties aspects of the bill. I still have some of those concerns, although I accept that the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, of which I am not a member, has worked hard, as have the ministers, and I accept that the bill is probably okay.

I am still concerned that a chief constable up whose nose the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, or some radical group of socialists or liberals, gets might be induced to use the bill's powers wrongly. I was assured at stage 1 by the Minister for Justice that the powers would not be used against people like me, but there is still an issue to be considered.

I have a positive suggestion that might apply to this and other bills. We should have a routine system whereby, every two years after a bill such as this has taken effect, we should study how well it has done and see whether it can be improved. I have no doubt that the committee did very well, but none of us can entirely foresee the future or how the courts will interpret our efforts at legislation. It might therefore be useful to build into this sort of bill an administrative procedure for re-examining every now and then how well the legislation is doing.

Nevertheless, on the basis of all the reassurances that we have received, I am willing to vote in support of the bill, although one always has one's liberal worries.

Mr Jim Wallace: I am sure that Mr Gorrie accepts that the surveillance commissioner has to make an annual report to the Westminster Parliament and to this Parliament. That will ensure that not only is there oversight but that oversight is reported on.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Atypically, Phil Gallie has been slow to press his request-to-speak button, but I shall allow him to make a final point before I call the minister to wind up.

16:04

Phil Gallie (South of Scotland) (Con): Thank you very much, Presiding Officer. I apologise for my failure to push the button.

In visiting hostelries around the country, I have never found regulation of investigatory powers to be the key issue of the day, but we politicians get our enjoyment in the strangest of ways—believe it or not, I have enjoyed taking this bill through the committee and through the Parliament.

I add my compliments to those that have been passed to others. The passage of the bill has been serious, but it has had its fun moments. The bill was forced on the Parliament through incorporation of ECHR and it runs in parallel with the UK bill. I feel sure that the bill will receive the approval of Parliament. I would like the minister to inform the chamber when he expects the bill to be implemented. Will it be implemented after the bill south of the border goes through Westminster, or will it be implemented immediately?

Euan Robson talked about legislation being right first time. This Parliament—from Henry McLeish's point of view—looks to industry and business to get things right first time, so there is a duty on this Parliament to get things right first time. When legislation is rushed through, there is a risk that we will not get it right, and we have to accept that this bill has been rushed. However, the Justice and Home Affairs Committee has had a fair amount of time to examine the issues. Donald Gorrie suggested that we should come back to reconsider the bill. With bills such as this, which have been rushed, it may be worth looking back and reflecting.

16:07

The Deputy Minister for Justice (Angus MacKay): I perennially seem to end up at the end of such debates having the role of saying, "Thank you for coming, good night and have a safe journey home." Members will be pleased to hear that my speech will not be much longer than that, but I will briefly pick up one or two points.

As has been acknowledged, the bill has had to proceed through Parliament very quickly in order to meet the deadline of 2 October. In direct answer to Phil Gallie's point, the UK act is already enacted—it has passed through the Houses of Parliament. Our deadline is 2 October so that we comply with the requirements of ECHR and the Human Rights Act 1998. That is why we have moved so quickly on the legislation.

It is genuinely and truthfully thanks to the hard work of the members, clerks and officials of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee that the bill has, despite the pace at which we have moved, received proper scrutiny at each of the parliamentary stages. That scrutiny is an essential part of the legislative process. I want to place on record my gratitude to the members of those committees—especially the Justice and Home Affairs Committee—for their hard work and tolerance. I am sure that the bill has been improved by the changes that have been made—for example, the Executive's withdrawal today from its position on the catch-all power.

On behalf of the Executive, I also thank the representatives of the Law Society of Scotland, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and Professor Alan Miller of the Scottish Human Rights Centre, all of whom offered their advice as witnesses during the stage 1 consideration of the bill.

The bill has had proper consideration, notwithstanding the odd comment about the pace at which it has moved through and the need to address seriously the issues raised. At each stage, we have comprehensively covered all the issues. Not all members may be satisfied with all the outcomes, but we have given the issues a thorough airing.

As Phil Gallie rightly pointed out, we have had our lighter moments. I was amused by Dennis Canavan talking about a small number of people trying to do bad things—that was quite interesting coming from Dennis. We have witnessed the repeated appearance of Euan Robson's nasturtiums, which members of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee will recall from stage 2. Today, we had the spectacular introduction from Christine Grahame of a new form of superhero—the binoculars-in-the-lupins man. I am not quite sure how he would get that on the front of his vest, but he represented a moment of light entertainment.

All in all, I think that at the end of today, when—as I hope—Parliament approves the bill, we will have done a good job of work and produced a good piece of legislation, which will, when all is said and done, balance civil rights with the requirements for law enforcement in a way with which we can all be comfortable. I ask members of the Parliament to support the motion to pass the bill.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We have made good progress on the bill today, so I am looking to the Minister for Parliament to see whether he can help to move business forward.

The Minister for Parliament (Mr McCabe): I seek permission to move a motion without notice.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I am minded to accept such a motion. Is it agreed that we accept a motion without notice?

Members: Yes.

Motion moved,

That decision time be moved to 16:10.—[Mr McCabe.]

Motion agreed to.

Decision Time

16:10

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Mr George Reid): We move to decision time. There is only one question to be put as a result of today's business.

The question is, that motion S1M-1136, in the name of Mr Jim Wallace, which seeks agreement that the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Bill be passed, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

Motion agreed to.

That the Parliament agrees that the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Bill be passed.

Scots and Gaelic

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Mr George Reid): The final item of business today is a members' business debate on motion S1M-1111, in the name of Irene McGugan, on the programme of action for Scots and Gaelic in the European year of languages. The debate will be concluded without any question being put after 30 minutes.

Motion debated,

That the Parliament notes that 2001 is to be the European Year of Languages; notes that European Union funding support will extend to projects including regional and minority languages which member states designate as eligible; urges the Scottish Executive to make representations on behalf of Scots and Gaelic to Her Majesty's Government in order to ensure that Scotland's indigenous languages are proposed for inclusion, and believes that the Executive should support a programme of action for both languages as part of the European Year of Languages.

At the Pairliament taks tent at 2001 is ti be the European Year o Leids; taks tent at siller fae the European Union wull rax the lenth o projecks for regional an minoritie leids at memmer states allous as eligible; asks the Scottish Executive ti mak representations on behauf o Scots and Gaelic, til Her Maijestie's Guivernment for ti mak shuir at Scotland's hame leids is proponed for inclusion, an trowes at the Executive shuid gie a heize ti baith leids as pairt o the European Year o Leids.

Gun toir a' Phàrlamaid an aire gur e Bliadhna Eòrpach nan Cànain a bhios ann an 2001; gun toir i an aire gum faodar taic-airgid an Aonaidh Eòrpaich a bhuileachadh air pròiseactan a ghabhas a-steach mion-chànainean is cànainean roinneil a tha air an sònrachadh le Stàitean a tha 'nam ball; gun iarr i air Riaghaltas na h-Albann tagradh a dhèanamh do Riaghaltas na Rìoghachd as leth na h-Albais agus na Gàidhlig a dhèanamh cinnteach gun tairgear cànainean dùthchasach na h-Albann le Riaghaltas na Rìoghachd airson taic-airgid an Aonaidh Eòrpaich agus gun cuir Riaghaltas na h-Albann, mar phàirt de Bhliadhna Eòrpach nan Cànain, a làn-thaic ri prògram gnìomha airson an dà chànain.

16:12

Irene McGugan (North-East Scotland) (SNP): I will start by declaring an interest, in that I am the very recently appointed preses of the Scots Leid Associe.

The first part of the motion calls on the Executive to ensure that Scots and Gaelic are eligible for inclusion in the European year of languages. I can confirm that they are. I would have been prepared to give credit where it was due, if their inclusion had been the result of vigorous lobbying by the Executive, as the motion urges the Executive to do. However, that was not the case. The Department of Education and Employment in London decided to adopt an inclusive approach and to include all languages, so Scotland's minority languages are eligible only by default.

The European year of languages is a joint initiative by the Council of Europe and the European Union, with further support from the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation. It involves more than 40 countries across Europe, many of which—in particular Iceland, Luxembourg and Portugal—are making detailed plans. The twin slogans are "Languages for Life" and "Languages Open Doors".

On one level, the benefits to Scots and Gaelic from the programme could be considered small. Minority languages will be bidding against the bigger languages, which have better resources. The process will be extremely bureaucratic and there is a small budget—an estimated £200,000 in total for the United Kingdom. It is probable that only 10 projects across the UK can be supported. The Centre for Information on Language Teaching and Research in England will co-ordinate the programme and act as a filter for project applications, and I understand that it intends to bid in its own right for a project.

Despite the programme's bureaucracy and limited budget, I anticipate that the European year of languages will be a success in Europe, but for the smaller languages and their communities to gain, we must have some help. At the very least, the initiative gives the Scottish Executive an opportunity to highlight the languages and to kick-start a programme of support.

The motion and the European year of languages give Scots and Gaelic equal treatment. Although the status and needs of the two languages are very different, they are equally important as bedrocks for many kinds of cultural expression.

The Irish, by promoting their culture, have demonstrated clearly the link between cultural tourism and inward investment and economic growth. Investment in action to promote Scots and Gaelic would undoubtedly fortify and enhance approaches to overseas companies and organisations and make our Scottish goods and services more attractive worldwide. Ishbel MacAskill, the well-known Gaelic singer says:

"We would be mad not to take advantage of this immensely valuable marketing tool".

It is wonderful to have the Deputy Minister for Highlands and Islands and Gaelic here to respond—in his own language, I believe—but where is the minister for Scots? We now have a Gaelic officer for the Scottish Parliament, which is tremendous, but when will we have a Scots officer for the Parliament? Despite assurances of support, the Executive has failed to give proper support to the Gaelic language and has given even less to Scots. We have not forgotten the promises that were made after the census debate. In June last year, the minister stated publicly that secure status was top of the agenda for the Executive and that legislation to achieve that would be put on the fast track. Earlier this week, we learned from the First Minister that legislation has in fact been fast tracked off the agenda. That is shameful. My colleague Mike Russell has a great deal more to say on that matter.

The First Minister (Donald Dewar): Really.

Michael Russell (South of Scotland) (SNP): It is something to look forward to.

Irene McGugan: Indeed.

In relation to Scots, there is a loss of confidence as a result of lack of official and public use and a loss of its vocabulary and distinctive grammar due to lack of teaching. I count myself as a casualty of that. Yet most of us in lowland Scotland are not far away from the language, in the sense that most adults can still tell the difference between effective and authentic Scots and haivers, and can enjoy the work of Burns and other Scots authors with a directness of appreciation due to the fact that we have heard or may still speak the language ourselves.

There is an issue of prejudice, which needs to be overcome. Often Scots is considered as neither proper nor correct and, in consequence, as less worthy. Such prejudice could be overcome to a large extent if the Scottish Parliament set a positive example. Public signage in Scots and recognition of Scots as an official language alongside English and Gaelic would help greatly.

Education is the key. There must be better opportunities for children to access their languages and to get a firmer grasp of Scottish history. Those elements should be integral to the curriculum and should permeate all subject areas. Among the Scottish teaching profession there are many enthusiasts for Scots and many with a substantial knowledge of Scots, but we do not use them to best effect because we do not make available professional development and a meaningful role based on what they know and could teach.

The study of Scots language and literature is now beginning to be undertaken at the end of the school curriculum, which is good. However, it is a modest start, which lacks educational logic in being built on nothing substantial in prior study. It makes Scots an academic afterthought to an education entirely airted at English; something to be howked up from a dictionary and painfully reconstructed, on a par with texts in Anglo-Saxon or Old French. Basic Scots is the birthright of everyone in Scotland and should be present from early school.

I was most impressed to learn that the BA course in Scottish music at the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama teaches both indigenous languages, and all students sing in Scots, Gaelic and English.

There is a body of opinion that holds that discrimination against speakers of a language is in breach of international protocols, namely the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Universal Declaration of the Collective Rights of Peoples and the Oslo recommendations regarding the linguistic rights of national minorities. How embarrassing it would be for the Executive to defend its action or inaction in international courts during the European year of languages.

We need to use the opportunity that will be afforded by the year of languages to set out a programme of action, not only for next year, but on an on-going basis. The Executive must be proactive. There are plenty of language enthusiasts in all parts of Scotland who would be more than willing to help out.

As the newly published cultural strategy supports the languages, this would be a fine chance for the Executive to put its money where its glossy documents are. Let us have constructive policy development and affordable measures for both languages. Let us see the intelligent beginnings to an official support system and priorities on immediate need to ensure that Scots and Gaelic are transmitted to the next generation. Political direction lies with the Executive, where the responsibility for action also lies.

It fair behoves us ain an a tae gie muckle steer tae this Pairlement tae mak shair baith oor hame leids are gien a heize in the year o Leids in 2001.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: That wis a braw wee speech, Maistress McGugan. An we wish ye weel as the newly eleckit preses o the Scots Leid Associe.

As 13 members have asked to speak and we are 90 minutes ahead of when we would normally start our members' business, I am exceptionally minded to entertain a motion to extend business by up to 30 minutes.

Motion moved,

That the meeting be extended by 30 minutes.—[Mr Russell.]

Motion agreed to.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We have up to an extra 30 minutes; if members can keep to three-minute speeches, we can get everyone in.

16:21

Cathy Peattie (Falkirk East) (Lab): If we take away people's language, we take away their voice. Not so long ago, children were punished for using their mither tongue. Bairns spoke their mither tongue, but when they went to school, they were not allowed to speak it. Indeed, many of us have grown up being told that our mither tongue was either slang or unacceptable.

There were no role models speaking Scots; in fact, Scots on television or radio was often met with ridicule and shame. I remember my granny—who was, and still is, a Glaswegian—saying of someone being interviewed on Argyle Street, "Listen to her. Who does she think she is? Does that no sound terrible?"

I am happy that things are changing. Scots is the language of Burns and Fergusson. It is alive in our songs, tradition and literature, and in our communities the length and breadth of Scotland. I am pleased to hear that there is a growing trend of encouraging the use of Scots in our schools.

I also welcome the work that is happening in our communities, because communities cannot find their voice unless they feel confident to stand up and say what is important to them without feeling the need to use someone else's language. In promoting and encouraging active citizenship, we should encourage people to use their own language. Furthermore, it is important to support the agencies that are involved in working at community level.

The European year of languages is important but it provides only a small amount of money that will fund a good party or one or two projects. I am not trying to undermine those projects, but we all believe that more than that is needed. We must continue the work of Scots, and celebrate and promote our language. I am pleased that the cultural strategy recognises the importance of Scots and our indigenous languages, and look forward to the day when the folk of Scotland can stand up and feel confident and proud to use their mither tongue.

I agree with Irene McGugan—as a lallans Scots, I want to come into the Parliament and see Scots signage. If people see their Scots language written, they will start to believe that it is their language and that they have every right to use it.

I thank Irene for today's debate, and look forward to strengthening our indigenous languages in many more debates in the Parliament.

16:24

Mr Jamie McGrigor (Highlands and Islands) (Con): I welcome the debate and the opportunity once again to pledge Scottish Conservatives' support for Gaelic and to urge the Scottish Executive to do all that it can to ensure that the Gaelic and Scots languages really benefit from the extra funding from Europe. That funding must be seen as a bonus to existing funding. We must take advantage of the European year of languages.

I have never doubted Alasdair Morrison's commitment to Gaelic. Indeed, the Scottish Parliament information centre's research note of 2 March states that, shortly after his appointment, the Deputy Minister for Highlands and Islands and Gaelic said that secure status for Gaelic was the Executive's main priority. I was a little surprised, therefore, to read in The Scotsman yesterday that our First Minister refutes that statement and does not appear to want that status at all. Perhaps the minister can clear up the confusion for the benefit of the chamber and the 70,000 Scottish Gaelic speakers, many of whom live in his constituency. I am sure that he will be asked to clear up the matter when he attends tomorrow's Gaelic conference in Nairn.

Recently, I visited Sabhal Mòr Ostaig, the excellent Gaelic college in Skye whose extension was opened by our party's chief whip, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton. That establishment offers teacher training to Gaelic teachers. Along with Lews Castle College in Lewis, it forms the nucleus of higher Gaelic education. Both establishments are essential parts of the new University of the Highlands and Islands, which was started by Michael Forsyth.

On 7 February, the Deputy Minister for Children and Education acknowledged the need to increase the number of Gaelic-medium teachers by 150 in the next seven years. I ask Alasdair Morrison to reaffirm that commitment and to give as much support as possible to giving parents the choice to educate their children in the Gaelic medium if they so wish.

Education is the key to sustaining the impetus that has been on-going for nearly 20 years. In the Basque country, teachers are taken out of schools and coached in the Basque language until they become fluent. That could be done in Scotland with Gaelic.

We are still awaiting an announcement on a fast-track teaching solution for Gaelic. That is in the pipeline and I urge the Executive to back it up when the Gaelic playgroups association eventually produces it. I urge the Executive to increase funding for local authorities to enable them to employ more nursery nurses and pre-school staff who can run Gaelic nurseries, thus ensuring that children can enter school fluent in the language. I urge the Executive also to continue to support Gaelic broadcasting and the much-mentioned Gaelic unit in Tollcross Primary School. That would be a sign of the confidence of our capital city in our Highland heritage.

16:27

Mr John Munro (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD): At the outset, I must say that I am disappointed that the Scottish Parliament, and particularly the Executive, has not seen fit to achieve secure status for the Gaelic language. After the announcements last year in Portree, it was expected that secure status would be with us in a short time. I am disappointed at the comments this week that make it appear that that is not likely.

However, next year is the European year of languages and I am delighted to participate in the debate. I congratulate Irene McGugan on bringing an important issue to the attention of the Scottish Parliament. I hope that, as a result, minority languages will be given the support and resources of which they have been deprived.

I do not need to tell anyone here that many minority and lesser-used languages exist in the member states of Europe. They have survived the difficulties of war and oppression simply because of the will and determination of the minorities who cherish them. We in Scotland are equally determined to protect our language and culture and are justly proud of them. We will endeavour at all times to promote, sustain and retain our languages for the benefit of generations to come.

I do not need to tell anyone here that my mother tongue is Gaelic—

The Deputy Presiding Officer: If you wish to speak Gaelic, simultaneous translation facilities have been arranged.

Mr Munro: I think that the occasion would be better served by my continuing to speak in English, although I welcome the opportunity to use Gaelic. I will say something on that later on.

When I went to school, I learned English. It is remarkable that I was not belted for learning Gaelic but I was belted for not learning English. I had the best of both worlds, because I had a Gaelic-speaking teacher. I was quite fortunate.

I am delighted that our Scottish Parliament has again agreed to use Gaelic in the chamber, and I hope that, in the months and years ahead, many more members will take advantage of that opportunity.

I acknowledge the support for and advances made in Gaelic over the past 20 years. I have been involved in promoting the Gaelic language and culture and, from small beginnings, we have achieved quite a lot—in fact, it has been quite remarkable. That includes advances in broadcasting, teaching, music and cultural events, festivals and fèisean, to mention just a few areas.

Last Saturday, I attended a festival at Eden Court Theatre in Inverness. Young people from all over Britain who had won linguistic and musical events in their areas were there. We were told that the competition had started out with 1 million participants, stretching from Devon and Cornwall on the south coast, through Wales, taking in Ireland, Northern Ireland and Scotland, to the northern isles. The event at Eden Court was marvellous, and demonstrated the close co-operation that exists between peoples and communities through language, music and culture.

We must keep up the good fight to sustain and promote the language and culture that we all appreciate and enjoy so much. I suggest that we support Irene McGugan in her noble attempt to encourage the Scottish Executive to support a programme of action for Scotland's indigenous languages as part of the European year of languages.

16:32

Dr Winnie Ewing (Highlands and Islands) (SNP): As Cathy Peattie said, language is a precious thing. We have watched our country treating our two languages with utter contumely. However, it is not too late in my opinion, and we have heard from Jamie McGrigor about some of the improvements that have been made. I am glad to welcome what Irene McGugan said, and her new appointment.

My grandparents spoke only Scots, and my mother and father spoke it when they did not want us to know what they were saying—so they thought. We kept quiet, because we knew perfectly well, and we wanted to hear what they were saying.

Having that double tongue was something that went with me without my full realisation until I attended a play in Scots at the Citizens' Theatre as a teenager, and I found out that my fellow classmates did not understand it, whereas I did. I experienced a delight at knowing that I had two tongues. I had accepted it as part of life, with Scots phrases and words jumbled in.

The first time that I spoke at the House of Commons, I had to prune my language of Scots words. If someone used a Scots word, it produced a totally bewildered look around the place, for example when I used the word "swither". The members all stopped and said, "I don't understand." I wondered what the English word for "swither" was, and they shouted, "prevaricate" and "hesitate". Neither of those words is exactly the same as "swither". After analysing it, I found that the word is untranslatable into English except by the phrase "hesitating between two courses of action". That illustrates part of the strange experience of speaking Scots.

Scots, as has already been said, is the language of many kids in the playground. I instance the example given by a Dundee poet whom I met at a Burns supper in Luxembourg. He got an appointment as a roving teacher of Scots in the Borders. He told the tale about a little boy who said to him, "Please, sir, does oor real teacher ken whit you're daein?" In a way, that highlights what I am saying about the confusion over the two tongues. It is very good that we are trying to sort out that confusion.

We have a vast amount of literature, culture and songs in Scots, and we have the same from the Gaelic. Scots is one of the Germanic family of languages, but Gaelic is very difficult to learn. I speak with some feeling: even though I recently spent a week at Sabhal Mòr Ostaig, along with Fergus—in class 3—I am still finding conversation difficult, although I can read and write the language. But what a treasure trove of culture the Gaelic language offers us—the music, the songs and the history.

I was disappointed and shocked to read in yesterday's edition of The Scotsman that Labour's manifesto promise has been broken. I did not like the First Minister's arguments—at least, the arguments that were attributed to him. He said:

"We do not want to go down the Welsh road and end up with a situation where public bodies in Scotland would have legal obligations to conduct their business in Gaelic"

and to have bilingual road signs. Why on earth can we not have bilingual road signs? Tourists love them, as they make them feel that they are in a distinct country. There will be no complaints from tourists about bilingual road signs. Is not it also a bit fanciful and childish to suggest that East Ayrshire Council will suddenly want to conduct its debates in Gaelic? That is extremely unlikely.

I say to the First Minister, by way of reassurance, that, in the European Union, the Irish language has a semi-official status and that causes no one any difficulty, as it is used with decency and reasonableness. If Irish members want to speak in Irish, they can do so. They give notice, so that there can be proper interpretation—they do not abuse that right. If they want any European document to be translated into Irish, they can have it translated. If a "reasonable demand" was made by the locals for education in a certain language to be made available—as it was referred to in the SNP amendment 34 to the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Bill, which was wrongly disagreed to by the Lib-Lab Government coalition—I do not imagine that a lack of reasonableness would break out in East Ayrshire.

We need positive discrimination. Although there is active support for the Welsh language, it is still up against the most dominant language in the world: English. English is so dominant that almost everybody in the European Union speaks it, along with two or three other languages. We must recognise that there should be positive nurturing to ensure the secure status for languages that we were promised, and the demands of parents must be met.

16:37

Rhoda Grant (Highlands and Islands) (Lab): I congratulate Irene McGugan on securing the debate; I agree with the sentiments in her motion. Having our native languages included in those European projects would give them a great boost.

Although funding has been invested in the Gaelic language, there is always the need for more—for example, to provide education not only for young people but for parents in the areas where Gaelic has skipped a generation. Not many people have been as lucky as John Farquhar Munro in having a teacher who spoke Gaelic. Winnie Ewing mentioned the ploy that was used by her parents of speaking the Scots language when they were trying to keep a secret from her. Imagine the plight of the parents when the children reverse the roles and speak Gaelic to keep secrets from them.

Our languages would benefit not only from the increased resources but from the increased status that European Union funding would bring. It would help promotion of the languages, by encouraging innovative projects. For example, we should encourage Scottish companies to greet callers in one of our native languages: that would raise awareness of our culture.

Many people want Gaelic and Scots to flourish, and it is essential that all the groups that want that to happen unite in a common cause. I urge the Executive to do all that it can to ensure that those languages are designated for European funding.

16:38

Mr Jamie Stone (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD): I congratulate Irene McGugan on securing this important debate and I endorse what has been said about the idea of cultural tourism. The involvement of music, dance and storytelling is hugely important, and that approach works. I add my tuppence to that argument.

I also make a slightly broader appeal. Whether or not Gaelic is underpinned by statute, I appeal against the use of a broad brush. The Scots that is spoken in Caithness is very different from the Scots that Irene McGugan might recognise, and includes words such as scorrie, meaning a seagull, and semmit, meaning a vest. Because of the Herculean efforts of a few individuals, that language survives and is promoted. It is not easy. By moral support at least—it would not cost much money—we should encourage that diversity.

That is equally true for Gaelic. The language map of Scotland is much more complicated than people think. As Mike Russell knows, Gaelic varies. Where I live, we have the last vestiges of Easter Ross Gaelic, including some words that are not recognised by the likes of John Farquhar Munro or by people who live in Skye. One example is the word tùchan, meaning a slight cough, which I have spoken about with John and with Alasdair Morrison. It is not classical Gaelic, but it is good old Balintore Gaelic.

Therefore, when we approach Gaelic and Scots, I appeal for a fine rather than a broad brush. Remember that our languages and the variations in them are Scotland's jewellery and that the diamond is multifaceted. I have talked about that to Rhona Brankin, and she and Alasdair Morrison have been more than receptive on the matter. It is desperately important to remember the variety and the danger of getting rid of it—it is like biodiversity; it risks damaging the fine detail of our culture.

16:41

Alex Johnstone (North-East Scotland) (Con): I too would like to thank Irene McGugan for the debate. It is significant that she has been given a position in the Scots Leid Associe at this time. It is well timed, given that 2001 is to be the European year of languages, that we should have someone in such a distinguished position as a member of the Parliament. It will be even more significant during 2001.

It has been my pleasure to support Irene in the past. Unfortunately, I could not support her on the census order and I apologised to her at the time. I promised then that I would take the opportunity to speak again in support of what she is trying to do.

The motion states that the Parliament

"believes that the Executive should support a programme of action for both languages as part of the European Year of Languages."

The record of successive Governments on Gaelic is fairly good. We need not rest on that record—we need to do more work—but my concern is with Scots and how it is treated in relation to Gaelic and the other languages in Britain and western Europe. My concern particularly is the attitude held by a significant number of people in the Parliament, that there is no such language as Scots. When Irene McGugan was making her opening remarks, I heard a chirp coming from my left, where the First Minister was sitting at the time, suggesting that very thing.

Michael Russell: Shame.

Alex Johnstone: The member may say shame. I could not criticise that because my culture spokesman, Brian Monteith, might well say the same thing. That is probably one of the few similarities between the First Minister and Brian Monteith. At least, hearing that chirp in my ear, it was nice to have the First Minister back.

I am concerned that we do not make the mistake of treating Gaelic and Scots as two arms of the same policy. Gaelic is a clearly identifiable language. While I believe that there is a Scots language, I do not believe that it is necessarily a single language. A very different language is spoken in Glasgow from what I hear spoken in Buchan. There is more than one culture that needs to be preserved.

Michael Russell: I wonder whether Alex Johnstone will reflect on the same difference in the English language. Perhaps he should go to Newcastle, then Aberdeen, Cornwall, Glasgow and Norwich. His argument is fallacious because in every language there are variations, but that does not make them different languages.

Alex Johnstone: I am delighted to accept that, but we are talking about Scots, and what concerns me is that we might allow ourselves to lose something that is extremely important. The most important thing that we need to remember when we consider Scots during the European year of languages is that so much of our culture depends on that language being understood by our young people.

We have already heard at some length from Cathy Peattie about the cultural aspects of language. Others have touched on that, too. The Gaelic language is an essential element of retaining Gaelic culture; the Scots language is an essential element of retaining Scots culture, as it has existed for hundreds of years and continues to exist to this day. That is why I am delighted that the Deputy Minister for Culture and Sport is here, so that I can express to her my concern that unless during the year of languages we make an effort in this Parliament to ensure that the Scots language continues to exist to some degree with our young people throughout Scotland and not just in the pockets where it remains a traditional language that survives in the way that indigenous languages tend to survive in other places, we will, if we lose that language, ultimately lose our culture.

The ancient Egyptians were well able to write and put their culture on to the walls of the tombs that exist to this day. Unfortunately, there is no one who can enjoy that culture by living it and reading it. That is my concern—that the great written and singing culture that exists in Scotland, in spite of the fact that it is preserved in books, may ultimately die because there is no one to understand it. I hope that we can take the opportunity to work together throughout 2001 to ensure that the Scots language is recognised and developed, and continues to be taught in our schools.

16:46

Colin Campbell (West of Scotland) (SNP): I can recall in infants 1 in Paisley grammar school, a very long time ago, the teacher pulling up a child who referred to "doing your wilkies". The teacher asked, "What is the correct word for 'doing your wilkies?'" My mother was from Stornoway—she was an English-speaking Leodhasach with a smattering of Gaelic words—so eagerly I put my hand up and gave the only word that I knew. I am sure that Alasdair Morrison will correct my pronunciation afterwards—I said, "Caran a' mhuiltein." That was met by a kind of astonished, blank expression on the face of the teacher, who proceeded to search round the class for further elucidation. An Anglo child said, "Somersaults." That seemed to satisfy everybody, but I went home, much distressed, to get it all sorted out.

On reflection during the past 1,000 years, I have worked out that I was a stranger in my own country, as indeed was the child who had referred to "doing your wilkies". On the premise that the motion might go some small way to preventing anyone from feeling like a stranger in their own country, I have much pleasure in supporting it.

16:48

Maureen Macmillan (Highlands and Islands) (Lab): I would like to thank Irene McGugan for initiating this most interesting debate. I hope that the European year of languages will provide an opportunity for us to celebrate language in all its diversity in Scotland. We are extremely lucky to have so many languages and dialects that reflect the historical and cultural diversity of the Scottish people. We should celebrate that diversity and not treat it as a nuisance, as we often do.

Because of my historical and cultural background—I did caran a' mhuiltein and not wilkies—I believe that Gaelic should be nurtured. The Executive has a good record in its policies for Gaelic, delivered, for example, through education and support for Gaelic broadcasting. I get two kinds of letter about Gaelic—one demanding that we stop wasting money on it, the other haranguing me for not making Gaelic education compulsory over the whole country. I wish both sets of people would be more relaxed about Gaelic. Gaelic should be no threat to non-Gaelic speakers, who should be glad to learn a phrase or two. Kate MacLean and Cathy Craigie are busy practising hard for the cross-party Gaelic group's ceilidh on Wednesday night. I am anxious to see how they get on and whether they remember the coaching that I was giving them—I will not say where—last night.

We cannot ram Gaelic down people's throats: that is counter-productive and turns people away from the language. More than anything else, I want Scots people who are non-Gaelic speakers to come to Gaelic as a natural choice when they want to learn a second language. I want them to feel that it is part of their culture too. I would like the European year of languages to be used as an opportunity to make people from all over Scotland feel comfortable with their own native community tongue. That, of course, means Scots.

I want to say a word about the complexity of Scots. Scots is not one language, but neither is it simply a collection of dialects. It is more complicated than that. Robert Burns wrote in three languages, depending on the register in which he was writing. He used Scots English, Scots and Ayrshire dialect. To a certain extent, many of us do the same sort of thing, depending on who we are speaking to. Some of us use more Scots words than others. However, as Alex Johnstone pointed out, the very diversity of the dialects in Scotland is an obstacle to having an official language. Hugh MacDiarmid came up against that problem, and the poetry that he wrote was in a manufactured Scots, rather than a live language. If we want to have Scots translations in Parliament, we must go about that with great care.

There are two serious problems for Scots that we must address. The first is that much Scots vocabulary is being lost from the Scots English language that most of us speak. I would like Scots vocabulary to be reinforced through the primary school system. We must have Scots texts in primary school, rather than wait until secondary school as happens at the moment in many areas.

The second problem is that the dialects of various areas of Scotland are under pressure from the media, from the increased mobility of the population and sometimes, I am afraid to say, from pre-school education. In education we must be protective of a young child's language and not try to correct them so that they speak standard English. As Cathy Peattie said, we must ensure that those who speak a Scots dialect are proud of how they speak, not embarrassed by it.

In the summer I was in Shetland, where people are proud of their distinctive dialect and culture. They celebrate it much as people in the western isles celebrate their Gaelic culture. I would like all communities to celebrate their culture, but to welcome everybody else's.

16:52

Michael Russell (South of Scotland) (SNP): I, too, congratulate Irene McGugan on securing this debate and on her appointment. I am sorry that I will speak solely in English today. There are a variety of reasons for that, not least the fact that I hoped not to be at this debate. That was not because I did not support it, but because I hoped to be on my way to Nairn for the Comunn na Gàidhlig dinner and for the congress that is taking place tomorrow. However, after reading the interview with the First Minister published in The Scotsman yesterday, I decided that I would not attend, so that no one could argue that the battering that the minister may get there tomorrow, despite the civility of his reception, is politically motivated. It will be the result of the justifiable and enormous anger that exists in the Gaelic community about the betrayal of an election promise—a promise that the Labour party and Labour Governments have made more than once to the Gaelic community and that has still not been honoured.

I want to say one thing about Scots. Today we have heard here repeated the calumny that Scots is not one language. That used to be the argument that was made about Gaelic: that there was a Gaelic dialect here and a Gaelic dialect there, that there were words here and words there, but that it should not be treated as a language. Let us lay that calumny to rest here and now. Scots is a language—a language that needs help and assistance.

On 1 July last year, from the reporters gallery in this chamber, Tom Fleming read a poem by Iain Crichton Smith, which called Scotland a three-voiced nation. Scotland has many voices, and many languages are spoken in Scotland. However, there are three languages of which we must take particular care. The first is English, because we have a way of speaking and using English that is subtly different from that of other people. I do not say that with any pride. However, it was T S Eliot who observed that English was spoken properly in only two places in the world: one was Richmond, Virginia, and the other was Edinburgh.

Mr Stone: And Inverness.

Michael Russell: He did not mention Inverness, but if he had been there I am sure that he would have.

We must, therefore, have some fondness for English. However, we have two languages that we must treat with great care and love, because they exist only here. If we do not look after them, nobody will. That is what this chamber should remember. Responsibility for looking after the Scots language rests with nobody apart from the people who live in Scotland. Scots does not exist elsewhere. Responsibility for looking after Gaelic in Scotland rests with nobody apart from the people of Scotland.

We have a particularly grave responsibility for Gaelic. My friend John Farquhar Munro knows the statistics, as does the minister, but let me repeat them. All the expectations are that next year's census will show—I do not think that we will fall out over the figures—that the number of Gaelic speakers has halved in 30 years.

The pre-census estimates from Comunn na Gàidhlig suggest that about 7,500 children in Scotland speak Gaelic. Those figures show that the language is perilously close to extinction. The question that the minister with responsibility for Gaelic must address is how to save that language.

I admire Alasdair Morrison and I am fond of him—if I keep saying that, people will think that there is something going on. Alasdair has the language at heart. I am pleased to see Rhona Brankin at the debate. I do not think that there are any other ministers in the Government who have Gaelic at heart—Alasdair is ploughing a lonely furrow. I hope that we can give him the strength to meet the needs of Gaelic. However, we must recognise the reality of the situation: Gaelic is perilously close to extinction. Therefore, I must ask the minister what he will do to save Gaelic and to ensure that the language lives on into the 21st century.

When I asked the minister a question last month, I was shocked to discover that his department makes no estimate of the number of Gaelic speakers that there will be in five, 10 or 15 years' time. It is time that the minister's department treated the issue as a No 1 priority. Many things have been tried. We have discussed broadcasting, and tomorrow we will discover what the Gaelic task force says about that. The one thing that would make a difference, however, would be for the Executive to tell the Gaelic community, and the rest of Scotland, that Gaelic has the same parity and status in law as English—it is an official language of this country. We must build on that in the way that Comunn na Gàidhlig anticipated in its report: by ensuring that there is access to Gaelic-medium education, that one can speak Gaelic in a court of law and that public bodies must at least consider how they use Gaelic.

During the national parks debate, I asked Rhona Brankin about the Gaelic situation in national parks. She asked for a written question and the answer that I received was that the decision on how to use Gaelic in national parks is a matter for the national park bodies. There is no policy and no direction.

The First Minister has skived off this debate—I am sorry to use a Scots word. I am shocked that he made derogatory comparisons with Wales yesterday. I was on "Good Morning Wales" this morning and I was pleased to tell the people of Wales the First Minister's comments.

The reality is that any Gaelic act will be a remedial one to overcome the damage that has been done over the past 100 years to the language and to those who speak it. It is essential that remedial action be taken. I have no doubt that the minister will talk about ways in which to achieve secure status for the language without legislation. I put to him the same proposition that I put in a letter that I sent him in July, when I published my proposal for a secure status bill. I will pursue my bill unless the Executive introduces one of its own, but if the Executive is willing to negotiate on the matter, I will take every action, without party politics—as, I am sure will my friend John Farquhar Munro—to ensure that we all co-operate to save the Gaelic language.

Gaelic is far more important than party politics. I ask the minister to take off his party political hat and to join all members in doing what is desperately needed. Let us save Gaelic by legislation in the Scottish Parliament; let us not destroy it by petty partisan politics.

16:58

The Deputy Minister for Highlands and Islands and Gaelic (Mr Alasdair Morrison): Tapadh leibhse a' Chinn-Chomhairle, agus tha mi toilichte cha rìribh gu bheil mi a' faighinn a' chothrom airson an treas turas mo chànan fhein a' chleachdadh a's a' Phàrlamaid a tha seo. Mar a tha cuimhne againn, bha deasbad againn agus ann an Gàidhlig agus mu dheidhinn na Gàidhllig, agus anns an deasbad mu dheireadh a bha a's a' Phàrlamaid a tha seo, deasbad dhe'n t-aon seòrsa, bha sinn cuideachd a'cleachdadh, chleachd mi faclan Gàidhlig.

Bha dùil agam dìreach togail an toiseach puingean a chaidh a thogail le grunn dha na buill a tha làthair. An toiseach bu toil leam a radh, agus tha mi a smaointinn gu bheil a h-uile ag aithneachadh an adhartas a thathas air a bhith air a' dheanamh 'sna tri bliadhna a dh'fhalbh agus cuideachd adhartas a chaidh a dheanamh fo stiuireadh an Riaghaltas a bha a staigh roimh'n seo. Bha mi toilichte a'chluintinn gu robh Winnie Ewing—a bhean-phosda Winnie Ewing agus a mac Fergus Ewing—gu'n robh iad an làthair aig cùrsa ann an Sabhal Mòr Ostaig, agus tha fios a'm gu bheil Winnie air mòran a ' dheanamh as leth chànan agus air beagan dheth ionnsachadh, ach tha mi cuideach an dòchas agus a' guidhe mas e agus gu'n fhaigh Fergus Ewing, gu'n fhaigh e ìre fileantachd 'sa chànan, gu'n tòisich e a' deanamh barrachd ciall 'nuair a bhios e a' bruidhinn 'sa Ghàidhlig na bhios e uaireannan a' bruidhinn 'sa Bheurla. Chuir e caran iognadh orm feumaidh mi a radh nach uh nach uh

Following is the simultaneous interpretation:

I am very glad to have a third opportunity to use my own language in the chamber in this debate in and on Gaelic.

First, I would like to take up a few points that were raised earlier. Everybody recognises the progress that has been made in the past three years and under the previous Administration. I am glad that Mrs Ewing and her son Fergus attended a course at Sabhal Mòr Ostaig. I know that Winnie has made a lot of effort in relation to the language, and if Fergus Ewing becomes fluent, I hope that what he says will be more sensible.

Dr Winnie Ewing: It will sound better in Gaelic.

Mr Morrison: Chuir e beagan iognadh orm a' Chinn Chomhairle nach do chleachd Iain Fearchar Rothach, nach do chleachd e a' Ghàidhlig, agus chan'eil mi a' tuigsinn fo thalamh carson a bha e a' cleachdadh, cleachdadh, cleachdadh na Beurla. Chaidh moran phuingean a' thogail agus bu toil leam cuideachd a' radh gu'm bi mise a màireach a' faighinn roi-innleachd airson structur, airson leasachadh a' chànain. Bi mi a' faighinn an aithisg sin madainn na màireach bho cathraiche na Buidhne Obrach a chaidh a chuir air chois—Seonaidh Ailig Mac a Phearsan—agus bi an làthair ann an Inbhir Nathairn, agus gu dearbh tha mi a' coimhead air adhart ris, ris , an turas sin.

Chaifh tòrr a radh an diugh mu dheidhinn a' Phriomh Mhinisteir Dòmhnall Dewar. Tha mi a' smaoineachadh mas e as gu leugh thu am bratach a bha 'san aithisg a tha sin, agus a' leughadh an aithisg, nach'eil cùisean buileach cho dubhach agus a bha cuid a deanamh a mach. Thuirt sinne mar Phàrtaidh agus thuirt sinn mar Riaghaltas gu'n oibricheadh sinn airson tèarainteachd fhaighinn dha'n chànan. Sin a tha sinn a' deanamh—tèarainteachd airson na cànain—agus a' màireach, feasgar am màireach, bi Dòmhnall Dewar an làthair aig Co-Labhairt Bhliadhnail, agus a toirt òraid bhliadhnail Shabhal Mòr Ostaig seachad, agus bi e a rithist a' dearbhadh, agus faodaidh mi seo a radh, a' dearbhadh an seòrsa taic a tha sinn a' toirt, a toirt dha'n chànain.

Thog Cathy Peattie grunn phuingean mu dheidhinn agus bhuail I air—

Following is the simultaneous interpretation:

It surprised me that John Farquhar Munro did not use the language; instead, he used English.

Several points were raised. Tomorrow, the strategy on Gaelic organisations will be announced. I will be present in Nairn, and I look forward to that.

Much was said today about the First Minister, Donald Dewar. If members look at the headline of the article in The Scotsman, they will see that the situation is not quite as bad as has been made out. We have said, as a party and as a Government, that we aim to give security to the language. That is what we aim to do. Tomorrow afternoon, Donald Dewar will be present at the annual meeting of Sabhal Mòr Ostaig and once again he will state the support that we have been giving the Gaelic language.

Cathy Peattie raised several points—

Michael Russell: For the avoidance of doubt, will the minister make it clear whether the Executive will introduce legislation to achieve secure status, and if not, does he think that his statement in June, in which he said that such legislation was on the fast track, is tenable? Would he like to apologise for that and say that he was misinformed or misbriefed, or act in some other way to overcome the difficulty that it has created?

Mr Morrison: Uill. An uair a bhios mise a' bruidhinn an Inbhir Nathairn agus 'san Eilean Sgitheanach, bi mi a' deanamh gu math soilleir dè dìreach a tha sinn a' deanamh. Sin agad ag obair a dh'ionnsaidh ar h- amas agus sin agad an rud a gheall sinn a' dheanamh agus sin agad gu dearbh as tha sinn a' deanamh agus bu toil leamsa gu'm biodh sinn air chothrom barrachd agus barrachd a ' dheanamh ach tha sinn a' dearbhadh uair an deidh uair gur e sin a tha fainear dhuinn.

A tilleadh air ais gu beachdan a nochd Cathy Peattie, a nochd I a thaobh eachdraidh Albais, a bhrùidealacha a bh'ann o chionn bhliadhnachan a dh'fhalbh, tha gu fortunach a thaobh Burns, tha ball an seo Lewis Dòmhnallach—athar an t-Uramach Ruairidh Dòmhnallach nach maireann , dh'eadar-theangaich e a h-uile smid de sgrìobhadh Burns gu Gàidhlig.

Bu toigh leam a nis tionndadh gu prìomh chuspair an deasbad a tha seo agus cuideachd mar a rinn buill eile, taing a thoirt dha Irene NicGùgan airson an deasbad seo fhaighinn.

Tha mi an còmhnaidh a Chinn Chomhairle deidheil a bhith a' faicinn Gàidhlig agus Albais air an adhartachadh anns a h-uile suidheachadh 's aig a h-uile àm agus tha seo a' gabhail a-steach Bliadhna Eòrpach nan Cànan ann an 2001. 'S iomadh beachd eadar-dhealaichte a tha aig daoine mu na nithean a dh'fhaodar a dheanamh agus is docha gum biodh e na chuideachadh dhuibh nan toisichinn le bhith ag innse beagan dhuibh mun Bhliadhna agus a' phriomh amas a tha air a cul:

Tha 2001 air a bhith air a sonrachadh mar Bhliadhna Eorpach nan Canan leis a' Chomhairle Eorpach agus leis a' Choimisean Eorpach.

'S e priomh amas na bliadhna mothachadh a thoirt do shluagh na Roinn Eorpa gu bheil a h-uile cànan—chan e a-mhàin mòr-chànanan mar Beurla—airidh air ùidh agus airidh cuideachd air urram.

Tha An Comisean Eòrpach a' cur maoin ris a' phròiseact airson a' bhliadhna a bhrosnachadh tron Roinn Eòrpa. Theid am maoin seo a chleachdadh airson iomairtean fiosrachaidh agus airson pròiseactan co-mhaoinichte airson a' phoball a chur air chois aig ìre ionadail, roinneil, nàiseanta agus eadar-nàiseanta. Le còrr air 40 dùthaich a' com-pàirteachadh sa Bhliadhna, thathar a' sùileachadh gum bi farpais ann airson nan tairgsean maoineachaidh.

Chan ann direach airson aire a thogail mu chànanan a tha Bliadhna Eòrpach nan Cànan. Tha cuid de nithean cudromach mun Bhliadhna a thathar an dòchas a bhios na bhuannachd don luchd-com-pairteachaidh: a bhith ag adhartachadh tuigse eadar-nàiseanta; a bhith a' cur an ceill a' bheachd gu bheil a' Ghàidhlig a' fosgladh dhorsan; a bhith a' moladh sgil ann an cànanan eile mar bhun-sgil; agus a bhith ga dheanamh nas fhasa a bhith a' gluasad bho àite gu àite. 'S e sluagh-ghairm na Bliadhna "Fosglaidh Cànanan Dorsan".

Ach, tha a' ghluasad seo a' beantainn gu sonraichte ris an dòigh anns am bithear a' deiligeadh ris a' Ghàidhlig agus Albais sa Bhliadhna agus tha mi toilichte a radh nach bi sin na dhuilgheadas. Nuair bhathar a' beachdachadh air na h-ullachaidhean, bha oifigearan Riaghaltas na h-Alba ag iarraidh, agus fhuair iad cead air a shon, aonta gum biodh a h-uile cànan air a ghabhail a-steach. Mar thoradh air na co-dhunaidhean sin tha an Roinn Eòrpa air aontachadh sin a dheanamh. Cha deach liosta ullachadh agus chan eil cànan air fhagail as. Canaidh mi sin a rithist—chan'eil cànan air fhàgail as.

Following is the simultaneous interpretation:

When I speak in Nairn tomorrow I will make clear what we are doing, which is working towards secure status for the language. We aim to do more and more for the language.

Regarding Cathy Peattie's points on what happened many years ago in relation to Burns, Roddy Macdonald translated many of Burns's poems into Gaelic.

I thank Irene McGugan for making this debate possible. I am always keen to see Gaelic and Scots promoted wherever and whenever possible, and that includes the forthcoming European year of languages. Many views have been expressed and opinions shared on what might be done. It may be helpful if I begin by sharing with members some of the background to the year.

The year 2001 has been adopted as the European year of languages by both the Council of Europe and the European Commission. The main objective of the year is to make European citizens aware that all languages—not just the widely known languages such as English—are equally deserving. The European Commission is providing a limited amount of funding to promote the year throughout Europe. That funding will be used for information campaigns and to co-finance a number of local, regional, national and transnational projects aimed at the general public. With more than 40 countries participating, it is expected that bids for funding will be competitive.

The European year of languages is not only about raising awareness of all languages. There are some important features of the year that, it is hoped, will benefit participants: the promotion of international understanding; the development of the theme that languages open doors; the promotion of foreign language abilities as a core skill; and the facilitation of increased mobility. In fact the slogan for the year will be "Languages Open Doors".

The motion relates directly to the involvement of Gaelic and Scots in the year, and I am pleased to say that that will not be an issue. When discussions on arrangements were under way, Scottish Executive officials pressed for, and gained, agreement that all languages would be eligible for inclusion. As a result of those discussions, the UK has decided to take an inclusive approach. No list has been compiled and no language has been excluded. All languages are included—

Mr Stone: The minister says that no language has been excluded. Does he recognise my plea that separate and distinct dialects such as that of Caithness must be underpinned and encouraged?

Mr Morrison: Tha mi a' cuir mo làn-thaic ris a bharail a tha sin agus tha a' smaoineachadh gu bheil mi feuchainn ri shoilleireachadh. Cha bhi cànan sam bith air a chumail a mach neo air fhàgail as anns a ghnothaich a tha seo.

Gu fìrinneach, tha Riaghaltas na h-Alba mar tha air tuilleadh 's a chòrr 's a thathar ag iarraidh an luib a' ghluasaid seo a choilionadh. Chan e a-mhàin gum bi a' Ghàidhlig is Albais air an riochdachadh aig ire Alba agus An Rioghachd Aonaichte, theid fàilte a chur air gach cànan ann am Bliadhna Eòrpach nan Cànan.

Ach a-nis gu na h-ullachaidhean airson dealbhadh agus rèiteachadh na Bliadhna san Rioghachd Aonaichte: Tha comataidh air a steidheachadh san Rioghachd Aonaichte a tha air a cho-òrdanachadh leis an Ionad airson Fiosrachadh mu Theagasg Cànain.

Tha cùisean Albannach air an riochdachadh air a' chomataidh seo leis an Ionad Albannach airson Rannsachadh is Fiosrachadh mu Theagasg Cànain (Scottish CILT). Tha cliù aig an Ionad seo ann an raon teagasg agus ionnsachadh cànain agus tha eòlas farsaing aca air cùisean cànain ann an Alba agus tha ceanglaichean làidir aca ri buidhnean Gàidhlig agus Albais. Tha e air steidheachadh, le cuideachadh bho Roinn Foghlam Riaghaltas na h-Alba, buidheann obrach Albannach a bheir air adhart nam molaidhean mu cho-obrachadh na h-Alba le Bliadhna Eòrpach nan Cànan.

Tha Comunn na Gàidhlig agus Biùro Eòrpach nam Mion Chànan nam buill den bhuidhinn seo. Tha Ionad Stòrais a' Chànan Albannaich agus Comunn Faclair Nàiseanta na h-Alba cuideachd an sàs anns na h-ullachaidhean airson na h-ath bhliadhna.

Thog grunn dhaoine roi-innleachd airson cultar. Tha an Roi-innleachd Cultarail Nàiseanta a chaidh fhoillseachadh o chionn ghoirid a' togail cheistean cuideachd mu Albais, Gàidhlig agus mion-chànanan eile agus bidh iad sin air an comharrachadh anns a' Phlana Gniomh a thathar ag ullachadh aig an àm a tha lathair. Agus tha mi smaoineachadh gu'n aontaicheadh Rhona Brankin—tha mi'n dòchas gu'n aontaicheadh Rhona Brankin leam an seo. Tha mi a smaoineachadh ged a tha sinn a bruidhinn mu dheidhinn stòras bheag de airgiod anns a phròiseact a tha seo gu'm biodh sinn a sùileachadh gu'm biodh cus a bharrachd na tha sinn a deanamh neo leigeas sin leinn a dheanamh gu'm biodh sinn a sùileachadh a bhith a deanamh barrachd na tha a' phròiseact sin a mìneachadh.

Sa cho-dhùnadh ma tha a Chinn Chomhairle, bu mhath leam dearbhadh dhuibh gu bheil Riaghaltas na h-Alba airson leantainn air a' toirt taic do Ghàidhlig agus Albais ann am Bliadhna Eòrpach nan Cànan san aon doigh 's a thathar air a bhith a' deanamh san am ullachaidh seo. Cha chrion an taic a thathar a' toirt dhan Ghàidhlig agus do Albais ann an 2001, Bliadhna Eòrpach nan Cànan ach chan urrainn do Riaghaltas na h-Alba a bhith an sàs nan aonar san obair seo agus tha mi air leth toilichte gu bheil na buidhnean Gàidhlig agus na buidhnean Albais a' co-obrachadh leis an luchd-eagrachaidh gus dòighean a shonrachadh anns am bi e comasach do chànanan dùthchasach na h-Alba buannachd fhaighinn as na cothroman a thig an luib Bliadhna Eòrpach nan Cànan.

Tha mi gle mhisneachail mu Bhliadhna Eòrpach nan Cànan agus tha mi cinnteach gum bi na buidhnean cultarail a tha ag obair an luib na Gàidhlig agus Albais comasach air feum a dheanamh den Bhliadhna seo a chum am maith fhein.

Tapadh leibhse a Chinn Comhairle.

Following is the simultaneous interpretation:

I fully support that opinion—no language will be left out.

In essence, the Scottish Executive has already achieved what has been asked for in the motion—and more. Not only will Gaelic and Scots be fully represented at Scottish and UK levels, but all languages will be welcomed in the European year of languages.

A UK committee, co-ordinated by the Centre for Information on Language Teaching and Research, has been established to plan and organise the year in the UK. Scottish interests are represented on the committee by the Scottish Centre for Information on Language Teaching and Research.

Scottish CILT is highly respected in the field of language learning. It has a formidable knowledge of language issues in Scotland and strong links with Gaelic and Scots organisations. With the support of the Scottish Executive education department, it has established a Scottish working group to take forward Scotland's involvement with the European year of languages.

Membership of the group includes Comunn na Gàidhlig and the European Bureau for Lesser Used Languages. The Scots Language Resource Centre and the Scottish National Dictionary Association are also actively involved in arrangements for the year.

While the European year of languages is essentially a European initiative, it is one that the Scottish Executive will continue to support. I am sure that Rhona Brankin would agree that much activity is being planned for the year throughout the UK. We expect more and more on the project. I would like to stress that the Scottish Executive is giving support to Gaelic and Scots.

Support for Gaelic and Scots will not fade during 2001—the European year of languages. However, the Executive cannot work alone on that, and I am delighted that Gaelic and Scots organisations are working with the organisers to identify ways in which Scotland's heritage languages can benefit from the opportunities offered by the European year of languages. I am enthusiastic about the year and feel sure that our Scots and Gaelic cultural organisations can use it to their best advantage.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Tapadh leibh, a Mhaighstir Moireasdan. Tha sin a' cur crìoch air an deasbad. Tha a' choinneamh dùinte.

Following is the simultaneous interpretation:

Thank you, Mr Morrison. That concludes our debate.

That feenishes oor debate. Ah noo close this meetin o the Pairliament.

Meeting closed at 17:08.

BUSINESS BULLETIN 162 / 2000

Monday 30 October 2000



Announcements

Section A - Daily Business List

Section B - Business Programme

Section C - Agendas of Committee Meetings

Section E - Written questions lodged on 27 September 2000

Section F - Motions and Amendments

Section H - New Documents

Section J - Progress of Parliamentary business




BUSINESS BULLETIN 162 / 2000

Monday 30 October 2000

Announcements




Transport (Scotland) Bill - Stage 2

In its third day of consideration of the Transport (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 on Wednesday 1 November, the Transport and the Environment Committee will not proceed beyond the end of Part 2 of the Bill. The deadline for lodging amendments for the third Marshalled List is therefore 5.30 pm on Monday 30 October.

If the Committee has not reached the end of Part 2 of the Bill that day, it will begin on the fourth day (8 November) at the point where it left off. Members are advised to lodge amendments as early as possible. As previously announced, amendments should be lodged with the clerks to the Committee.



BUSINESS BULLETIN 162 / 2000

Monday 30 October 2000

Section A – Daily Business List




Meetings of Committees

All meetings take place in Committee Chambers, Edinburgh unless otherwise indicated.



Education, Culture and Sport Committee

33rd Meeting, 2000

The Committee will meet at 1.30 pm in Committee Room 1

1. Questions for Minister (in private): The Committee will consider lines of questioning to the Minister.

2. School Exams Inquiry: The Committee will take evidence from—

The Minister for Children and Education:

Mr Sam Galbraith, MSP.

3. Update on Committee Business: The Committee will be updated on business in its current work programme.



BUSINESS BULLETIN 162 / 2000

Monday 30 October 2000

Section B - Business Programme




As agreed by the Parliament on 25 October 2000

Wednesday 1 November 2000

2.30 pm Time for Reflection

2.35 pm First Minister’s Motion to appoint Scottish Ministers

3.05 pm First Minister’s Motion to appoint junior Scottish Ministers

3.35 pm Executive Debate on official information and accountability to Parliament – the Executive’s Policy

followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions

5.00 pm Decision Time

followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1188 Mrs Mary Mulligan: Sydney Paralympics and Olympic Games (for text of motion see Section F)


Thursday 2 November 2000

9.30 am Scottish National Party Debate on Drugs Courts

followed by Scottish National Party Debate on Business Rates

followed by Business Motion

2.30 pm Question Time (for text of questions see Section D of Business Bulletin for Thursday 26 October 2000)

3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time

3.30 pm Executive Debate on National Cultural Strategy

followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions

5.00 pm Decision Time

followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1171 Alex Fergusson: Waiver of Groundwater Maintenance Charge (for text of motion see Section F)


Wednesday 8 November 2000

2.30 pm Time for Reflection

followed by Executive Debate on Equality Strategy

followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions

5.00 pm Decision Time

followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1236 Ms Sandra White: Glasgow and West Coast of Scotland Rail Infrastructure (for text of motion see Section F)


Thursday 9 November 2000

9.30 am Executive Debate on Children’s Issues

followed by Business Motion

2.30 pm Question Time

3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time

3.30 pm Executive Debate on Sport

followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions

5.00 pm Decision Time

followed by Members' Business




BUSINESS BULLETIN 162 / 2000

Monday 30 October 2000

Section C – Agendas of Committee Meetings




Justice and Home Affairs Committee

31 October 2000

31st Meeting, 2000

The Committee will meet at 9.30 am in the Chamber, Assembly Hall, the Mound, Edinburgh

1. Items in private: The Committee will decide whether to consider draft reports on stage 2 of the budget process 2001/02 and on the Leasehold Casualties (Scotland) Bill in private at its next meeting.

2. Legal Aid Inquiry: The Committee will consider the remit of its inquiry.

3. STUC Women's Conference: The Committee will consider an invitation from the Scottish Trade Union Congress to nominate a female representative to attend the STUC Women’s Conference.

4. Social Partnership Funding: The Committee will consider a draft application for social partnership funding.

5. Petition: The Committee will consider written evidence on petition PE89 by Eileen McBride on enhanced criminal record certificates from—

Barnardo’s Scotland;

Scottish Police Federation; and

the Law Society of Scotland.

6. Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill (in private): The Committee will consider a draft report on the Bill.



Finance Committee

31 October 2000

24th Meeting, 2000

The Committee will meet at 10.00 am in Committee Room 1

1. Committee Business: The Committee will consider whether to take agenda items 6 and 7 in private.

2. Holyrood Project: The Committee will consider a report from Ken Macintosh MSP, Reporter on the Holyrood Project.

3. Scottish Parliament Corporate Body Budget Proposal for 2001/02: The Committee will take evidence from.

Robert Brown MSP, Appointed Member, Scottish Parliament Corporate Body

Paul Grice, Clerk and Chief Executive, The Scottish Parliament

Stewart Gilfillan, Director of Corporate Services, The Scottish Parliament

4. 2001/2002 Budget Process: The Committee will be updated on various aspects of the budget process.

5. Salmon Conservation (Scotland) Bill: The Committee will receive consider the provisions of the Bill which introduce new or increase existing expenditure charged on or payable out of the Scottish Consolidated Fund (under Standing Orders Rule 9.12).

6. Inquiry into Resource Accounting and Budgeting: The Committee will be updated on the appointment of an adviser for the inquiry.

7. External Research: The Committee will receive a presentation from Professor Arthur Midwinter on the external research that the Committee has commissioned.



Subordinate Legislation Committee

31 October 2000

30th Meeting, 2000

The Committee will meet at 11.15 am in Committee Room 3

1. Delegated Powers Scrutiny: The Committee will consider the further response from the Scottish Executive to points raised on the following Bill—

Salmon Conservation (Scotland) Bill

The Committee will consider the subordinate legislation provisions in the following Bill—

Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) Bill

2. Executive Responses: The Committee will consider the responses from the Scottish Executive to points raised on the following instruments—

The Specified Risk Material Order Amendment (Scotland) Regulations 2000, (SSI 2000/344)

The Specified Risk Material Amendment (Scotland) Regulations 2000, (SSI 2000/345)

The Agricultural Subsidies (Appeals) (Scotland) Regulations 2000, (SSI 2000/347)

The National Health Service (General Dental Services) (Scotland) Amendment (No.2) Regulations 2000, (SSI 2000/352)

The Brucellosis (Scotland) Regulations 2000, (SSI 2000/364)

The Enzootic Bovine Leukosis (Scotland) Regulations 2000, (SSI 2000/365)

The Teachers’ Superannuation (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2000, (SSI 2000/366)

The Borders General Hospital National Health Service Trust (Establishment) Amendment Order 2000, (SSI 2000/353)

The Dumfries and Galloway Acute and Maternity Hospitals National Health Service Trust (Establishment) Amendment Order 2000, (SSI 2000/354)

The Yorkhill National Health Service Trust (Establishment) Amendment Order 2000, (SSI 2000/355)

The Standards in Scotland’s Schools etc. Act 2000 (Commencement No.3 and Transitional Provisions) Order 2000, (SSI 2000/361)

3. Affirmative Instruments: The Committee will consider the following instrument—

The Food Protection (Emergency Prohibitions) (Amnesic Shellfish Poisoning) (East Coast) (No.2) (Scotland) Order 2000, (SSI 2000/370)

4. Draft Affirmative Instruments: The Committee will consider the following instruments—

The Welfare of Farmed Animals (Scotland) Regulations 2000, (SSI 2000/draft)

The Budget (Scotland) Act 2000 (Amendment) (No.2) Order 2000, (SSI 2000/draft)

5. Negative Instruments: The Committee will consider the following instrument—

The Gaming Clubs (Hours) (Scotland) Regulations 2000, (SSI 2000/371)

6. Instruments not subject to Parliamentary control: The Committee will consider the following instruments—

The Food Protection (Emergency Prohibitions) (Amnesic Shellfish Poisoning) (West Coast) (No.3) (Scotland) Partial Revocation Order 2000, (SSI 2000/369)

The Food Protection (Emergency Prohibitions) (Amnesic Shellfish Poisoning) (West Coast) (No.3) (Scotland) Revocation Order 2000, (SSI 2000/372)

The Food Protection (Emergency Prohibitions) (Amnesic Shellfish Poisoning) (West Coast) (No.2) (Scotland) Partial Revocation (No.3) Order 2000, (SSI 2000/378)

7. Committee Remit: The Committee will consider a paper outlining a proposed change to its remit.



European Committee

31 October 2000

18th Meeting, 2000

The Committee will meet at 2.00 pm in The Hub, Castlehill, Edinburgh

1. Items in private: The Committee will consider whether to take items 5 and 6 in private

2. Convener's report: The Convener will update the Committee on

Letter received from the Minister for Transport and the Environment in relation to compliance with Directives 96/59/EC (PCB/PCT), 76/160/EEC (Bathing Water) and 79/923/EEC (Shellfish Waters)

Letter received from the Minister for Finance in relation to EQUAL and other Community Initiatives

3. Scrutiny of EC/EU documents: The Committee will carry out the scrutiny of documents received for this meeting

4. Inquiry into European Structural Funds and their implementation in Scotland (in private): The Committee will discuss its draft report

5. New working procedures and a revised work programme (November 2000 to June 2001): The Committee will discuss its draft report

6. Scottish aquaculture industry: The Committee will discuss the revised draft reporter’s report prepared by Maureen Macmillan MSP on the impact of European list 1 designated disease Infectious Salmon Anaemia and list 2 disease Viral Haemorrhagic Septicaemia on the Scottish aquaculture industry



Local Government Committee

31 October 2000

28th Meeting, 2000

The Committee will meet at 2.00 pm in Committee Room 1

1. Statutory Performance Indicators: The Committee will take evidence from Audit Scotland

2. Stage 2 of the Budget Process 2001/02: The Committee will take evidence from—

Scottish Executive

Professor Arthur Midwinter

3. Subordinate Legislation: The Committee will consider the following affirmative instrument—

The Train Operating Companies (Rateable Values) (Scotland) (No. 2) Order 2000 SSI 2000/draft

4. Stage 2 of the Budget Process 2001/02: The Committee will take evidence from Mr Jack McConnell, Minister for Finance



Rural Affairs Committee

31 October 2000

28th Meeting, 2000

The Committee will meet at 2.15 pm in Committee Room 2

1. Shellfish Poisoning: The Committee will take evidence from—

The Minister for Health & Community Care

The Deputy Minister for Rural Affairs

Officials from the Food Standards Agency

2. Budget 2001/ 2002 stage 2 proposals: The Committee will take evidence from the Minister for Rural Affairs.

3. Salmon Conservation (Scotland) Bill: The Committee will consider the outcome of its stage 1 consultation and decide the arrangements for oral evidence.

4. Petitions: The Committee will consider—

An Executive memorandum in response to PE194 from Mr D Keith of behalf on the Scottish Campaign for Public Angling regarding access to the River Tay.

PE 272 from the National Farmers’ Union of Scotland calling for amendment of the Disease of Fish (Control) Regulations 1994 to include compensation payments, rights of appeal and access to scientific data.

5 Subordinate Legislation: The Committee will consider The Diseases of Fish (Control) Amendment (Scotland) Regulations (SSI 2000/330) under the negative procedure

6 Proposed Agriculture Inquiry: The Committee will consider a draft research proposal in support of an Agricultural inquiry.

7 Report into the impact of the closure of the Islay Creamery: The Committee will consider the handling of a draft report.



Health and Community Care Committee

1 November 2000

24th Meeting, 2000

The Committee will meet at 9.30 am in Committee Room 3

1. Community Care Inquiry (in private): The Committee will consider its conclusions and recommendations.



Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee

1 November 2000

33rd Meeting, 2000

The Committee will meet at 9.30 am in The Chamber, Assembly Hall, The Mound, Edinburgh

1. Items to be taken in private: The Committee will consider whether items 3, 5 and 6 be taken in private.

2. Items to be taken in private: The Committee will consider whether items at the meeting on 8 November on Stage 1 of the Family Homes and Homelessness (Scotland) Bill and Stage 2 of the Annual Budget Process be taken in private.

3. Questions for the Minister: The Committee will consider its lines of questioning for the Minister for Communities on Stage 2 of the Annual Budget Process.

4. Annual Budget Process: The Committee will take evidence on Stage 2 of the Annual Budget Process from—

Wendy Alexander, Minister for Communities.

5. Family Homes and Homelessness (Scotland) Bill and Mortgage Rights (Scotland) Bill: The Committee will consider its reports for Stage 1 of the Bills.

6. Inquiry into Drug Misuse and Deprived Communities: The Committee will consider a further draft report of its Inquiry into Drug Misuse and Deprived Communities.



Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee

1 November 2000

25th Meeting, 2000

The Committee will meet at 10.00 am in The Hub, Castlehill, Edinburgh

1. Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Budget: The Committee will take evidence from the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, Nicol Stephen MSP.

2. Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) Bill: The Committee will take evidence from officials from the Department of Enterprise and Lifelong Learning.

3. Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) Bill: The Committee will take evidence from The National Union of Students, Scotland.

4. Subordinate Legislation: The Committee will consider the following negative statutory instruments—

The Education and Training (Scotland) Amendment to Regulations S! 2000/342

5. Scottish Utilities Forum: The Committee will discuss additional nominations of members to the Forum.



Transport and the Environment Committee

1 November 2000

25th Meeting, 2000

The Committee will meet at 10.00 am in Committee Room 2

1. Item in Private: The Committee will decide whether to take item 4 in private.

2. Transport (Scotland) Bill: The Committee will consider the Bill at Stage 2 (Day 3).

3. Public Petitions: The Committee will consider the following public petitions—

Petition PE3 from Hospitalfield Area Residents’ Committee on commercial oil seed rape crushing in their area and the effect of this activity on residents’ health

Petition PE17 from Western Isles Council on Skye Bridge discounting options for Western Isles residents

Petition PE23 from by Save Wemyss Ancient Caves Society calling for action to be taken to repair storm damage to the access of the caves

Petition PE27 from Skye and Kyle Against Tolls on Float Concessions for Skye Bridge

4. Water and the Water Industry Inquiry: The Committee will consider draft terms of reference for its inquiry into water and the water industry.



BUSINESS BULLETIN 162 / 2000

Monday 30 October 2000

Section E - Written questions lodged on 27 October 2000




S1W-10689 Margaret Jamieson: To ask the Scottish Executive, further to the answer to question S1W-10065 by Mr Frank McAveety on 9 October 2000, whether it will make available in SPICe a copy of the report of the Dog Identification Working Group.

S1W-10690 Margaret Jamieson: To ask the Scottish Executive, further to the answer to question S1W-10065 by Mr Frank McAveety on 9 October 2000, what the extent will be of any consultation on any proposals for change and, in particular, what groups would be involved and whether the general public will be able to comment.

S1W-10691 Margaret Jamieson: To ask the Scottish Executive, further to the answer to question S1W-10064 by Mr Frank McAveety on 9 October 2000, whether the observer at the Dog Identification Working Group took any part in the group’s deliberations and whether the observer provided the group with the views of the Scottish Executive.

S1W-10692 Margaret Jamieson: To ask the Scottish Executive how many reports are awaited from public local inquiries into planning matters.

S1W-10693 Margaret Jamieson: To ask the Scottish Executive how many reports from public local inquiries into planning matters are awaiting a ministerial decision.

S1W-10694 Margaret Jamieson: To ask the Scottish Executive how many reports from public local inquiries are outstanding by more than (a) three months, (b) six months, (c) nine months and (d) one year.

S1W-10695 Margaret Jamieson: To ask the Scottish Executive what targets are set for reporters in relation to completing reports into local planning matters.

S1W-10696 Alex Neil: To ask the Scottish Executive when the Minister for Health and Community Care will answer my letter of 28 June 2000 regarding Mr and Mrs Innes and the incidence of cepacia.

S1W-10697 Alex Neil: To ask the Scottish Executive when it will answer parliamentary question S1W-4411 which received a holding reply in February 2000.

S1W-10698 Linda Fabiani: To ask the Scottish Executive how much money has been spent in Scotland on research into multiple sclerosis since 1 July 1999 by (a) it and (b) other bodies.

S1W-10699 Donald Gorrie: To ask the Scottish Executive when it intends to respond to the letter from the editor of Scottish Licensing Law and Practice dated 20 December 1999 raising an anomaly in Scotland in the law governing all cash amusement with prize machines.

S1W-10700 Dorothy-Grace Elder: To ask the Scottish Executive when it will publish the findings of the review by the Scottish Ambulance Service of accident and emergency services.

S1W-10701 Dorothy-Grace Elder: To ask the Scottish Executive how many people died in each of the past five years in Glasgow while (a) waiting for an ambulance and (b) in an ambulance and en-route to a hospital.

S1W-10702 Dorothy-Grace Elder: To ask the Scottish Executive when it expects to receive the response from the Scottish Ambulance Service to A Service for Life by the National Audit Office and whether this response will be made public.

S1W-10703 Bruce Crawford: To ask the Scottish Executive what progress the Scottish Environment Protection Agency has made to date on developing guidance on targets for household waste recycling and whether the guidance will be completed by the end of the year.

S1W-10704 Bruce Crawford: To ask the Scottish Executive whether the Scottish Environment Protection Agency has a reliable and comprehensive database of information on waste management issues.

S1W-10706 Mr Kenneth Gibson: To ask the Scottish Executive whether Best Value reviews in local government are introduced as a means to deliver financial savings or as a means to consider the needs of local communities and their expressed views about services.

S1W-10707 Mr Kenneth Gibson: To ask the Scottish Executive when it will provide a definition of Best Value to be used in forthcoming legislation.

S1W-10708 Mr Kenneth Gibson: To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it will take to ensure the common application of Best Value across the public sector.

S1W-10709 Mr Kenneth Gibson: To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it will take to ensure the co-ordination of the Best Value external scrutiny process.

S1W-10710 Mr Kenneth Gibson: To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to improve local authority performance management and planning in relation to Best Value.

S1W-10711 Mr Kenneth Gibson: To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to ensure that local authorities link budgets and other resources to key service priorities.

S1W-10712 Mr Kenneth Gibson: To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to ensure that key decision makers, including elected members and officials receive full and accurate reports regarding local authority service performance.

S1W-10713 Mr Kenneth Gibson: To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to ensure that local authorities seek out local government benchmarking partners.




BUSINESS BULLETIN 162 / 2000

Monday 30 October 2000

Section F - Motions and Amendments




The full text of all outstanding motions and amendments will appear in the Business Bulletin every Monday.

Items marked with an asterisk (*) are new or have been altered. Asterisks in the text show the extent of alterations made.

Motions which members wish to be considered for debate as members’ business in the Parliament are marked with a hash symbol (#)


*S1M-1289 Nora Radcliffe: Recognition of British Sign Language in European Year of Languages 2001—That the Parliament welcomes the designation of 2001 as European Year of Languages, which has the aim of celebrating Europe’s linguistic heritage and promoting language learning; notes that individual Member States decide which languages should be included; recognises that British Sign Language (BSL) is one of the four most widely-used native languages in the UK, along with English, Welsh and Gaelic; also notes that BSL is the first or preferred language of 70,000 deaf people, and calls upon Her Majesty’s Government to have British Sign Language designated as eligible for this important project.

S1M-1288 Mr Brian Monteith: Recognition of the Success of the British Paralympic Team—That the Parliament extends its warmest congratulations to Caroline Innes from Fife on her achievement of winning two athletics gold medals in the 200 and 400 metre events, and for establishing a new 200 metre world record, and to all 214 members of the British Paralympic team competing in the Sydney Games, who have so far won more than 70 medals and produced a number of personal best performances.

S1M-1287# Christine Grahame: Funding for Disabled People and their Carers—That the Parliament recognises that the current levels of social security benefits for disabled people and their carers do not meet the costs of either disability or care; further recognises that means testing for community care services penalises both disabled people and their carers, and believes that the Scottish Executive should investigate and report separately on (a) income levels of disabled people and their carers, (b) take-up of services by disabled people and their carers and (c) social inclusion and equality of opportunity for these groups.

Supported by: Mr Kenneth Gibson, Tommy Sheridan*

S1M-1286 Tommy Sheridan: Glasgow Light Rail Scheme—That the Parliament believes that the construction of a light rail scheme in Glasgow would provide enormous benefits to the city in relation to jobs, improving the environment, tackling congestion and related pollution and regenerating the city as a tourist attraction; resolves therefore to reappraise urgently the Strathclyde Passenger Transport Executive’s private legislation proposal for a light rail scheme promoted in 1994 but rejected by four Parliamentary Commissioners, appointed under the Private Legislation Procedure (Scotland) Act 1936, in 1996, and agrees that this matter deserves to be investigated by the Minister for Transport and the Environment immediately.

S1M-1285# Mr Kenneth Gibson: Establishment of a Children's Fund—That the Parliament applauds the decision of the Chancellor of the Exchequer to establish a Children’s Fund south of the border as a way of providing funding to local organisations and communities to tackle child poverty; believes that such a fund will go a long way to help young people develop their own projects and solutions to everyday problems, fund existing initiatives, support voluntary and local community projects and help promote children’s involvement in services; is concerned that the Scottish Executive appears hesitant about establishing a Children’s Fund in Scotland, and calls for consultation with community children’s organisations and young people on the establishment of an innovative and creative Children’s Fund, without the complex system of partnerships and funding mazes that bedevil so many other of their strategies.

Supported by: Linda Fabiani

S1M-1284# Mr Kenneth Gibson: Voluntary Sector Access to Criminal Record Information—That the Parliament welcomes plans to introduce detailed criminal record checks on people working with children under 18 from July 2001; notes, however, that many voluntary organisations are deeply concerned at having to pay to obtain enhanced criminal record certificates; believes such costs place an extra burden on groups working with children; accepts the consensus position within the voluntary sector that it should not have to pay for access to vital child protection information; understands that financial barriers placed in the way of organisations working with children mean fewer safe environments for children and create a barrier to social inclusion, and asks the Scottish Executive to ensure that the voluntary sector free access across the board to criminal record information.

Supported by: Linda Fabiani, Tommy Sheridan*

S1M-1283 Alasdair Morgan: High Fuel Prices—That the Parliament expresses its continued concern at the escalating price of fuel and calls upon the Chancellor of the Exchequer to take measures to lessen the impact of such high fuel costs on the economic well-being of Scotland and its people and to encourage other EU member states to discourage the illegal transportation of fuel across national boundaries.

S1M-1282 Brian Adam: Aberdeen Alternative Festival—That the Parliament regrets the demise of the Aberdeen Alternative Festival and calls upon Aberdeen City Council, other agencies and the private sector to do everything possible to resurrect the festival in the near future and to put major emphasis on ensuring the survival of the community programme, which has done a great deal to bring the arts to the people and has encouraged many to participate in events.

Supported by: Shona Robison

S1M-1281# Nick Johnston: Difficulties Faced by Paper Makers in Scotland—That the Parliament acknowledges the difficulties faced by paper makers in Scotland, and particularly in Mid Scotland and Fife; recognises the pressure on paper making caused by the current currency variations, and is mindful of the potential job josses in the industry and the subsequent effect on the economies of areas of Scotland where paper making is a key industry.

Supported by: Mr Brian Monteith, Mr Keith Harding*

S1M-1280 Ms Margo MacDonald: Palestinian Resolution—That the Parliament recognises the importance of the recent resolutions of the United Nations Security Council and the United Nations General Assembly both condemning the level of violence employed by the Israeli Defence Force in the West Bank and Gaza; joins the universal demand for a just settlement of the Palestinian right to their own state free of occupation; calls for an end to the lethal use of force by the Israeli Defence Force; recognises that in Israel there is a peace movement which seeks a just settlement of Palestinian-Israeli relations, and joins in the call for a resumption of peace talks on the basis of equality, justice and dignity for the Palestinian people, including those now languishing in refugee camps.

Supported by: Kate MacLean, Mr John Munro, Mr Gil Paterson, Margaret Smith, Mr Adam Ingram, Roseanna Cunningham, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Maureen Macmillan, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Christine Grahame, Alex Neil, Donald Gorrie, Ian Jenkins, Mr Michael McMahon, Tommy Sheridan*

S1M-1279 Brian Adam: East Coast Mainline Rail Services—That the Parliament condemns GNER for terminating trains at Edinburgh indefinitely in order to maintain services south of the border, thus ignoring the needs of rail passengers in the North and East of Scotland, and calls on the Shadow Strategic Rail Authority to review this situation before it awards the 20 year franchise for the East Coast mainline.

Supported by: Mr Kenneth Gibson, Shona Robison

S1M-1276# Richard Lochhead: Condition of Medical Equipment—That the Parliament believes that an investigation should be initiated into the condition of medical equipment in Scotland’s hospitals, following the revelation that 25% of general medical equipment owned by Grampian University Hospitals NHS Trust is beyond its standard life and given that, according to Tayside University Hospitals NHS Trust, one reason why cancer waiting times in Tayside were among the worst in Scotland was due to broken-down equipment.

Supported by: Fergus Ewing, Margaret Smith, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Tricia Marwick, Shona Robison, Alex Neil, Tommy Sheridan*

S1M-1274 Tommy Sheridan: Independent Police Complaints Tribunal—That the Parliament agrees, in the light of the comments made by Tom Wood, Deputy Chief Constable of Lothian and Borders Police in The Herald newspaper on 24 October 2000, that the case for an independent Police Complaints Tribunal is now overwhelming and that such a body should be established as a matter of urgency.

Supported by: Shona Robison, Alex Neil

S1M-1273# Mr Duncan McNeil: Compensation for Mesothelioma Sufferers—That the Parliament notes the plight of shipyard workers and their families who were exposed to asbestos, became ill and have now contracted mesothelioma; expresses concern over the length of time their compensation cases are taking to reach conclusion and the use of so-called "blanket denials" by the defenders, and notes that this practice victimises and denies justice to these cancer sufferers.

Supported by: Mr Kenneth Macintosh, Malcolm Chisholm, Cathie Craigie, Elaine Thomson, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Phil Gallie, Janis Hughes, John Scott, Mike Watson, Scott Barrie, Shona Robison, Margaret Jamieson, Hugh Henry, Alex Neil, Mr Keith Harding*, Tommy Sheridan*

S1M-1272 Gordon Jackson: Govan Shipyard—That the Parliament notes that the BAe Systems Govan shipyard is in the running for major Ministry of Defence orders; welcomes the recent decision of BAe management to share work for the Scotstoun sister yard with Govan until spring; praises the yard’s strong reputation for Clyde-built quality; recognises it as the major employer at the heart of Govan; acknowledges that work is vital to secure the yard’s future for its skilled and dedicated workforce; encourages the Scottish Executive to continue making the case for Govan in representations to Her Majesty's Government; appreciates the efforts of MSPs, Scottish MPs and trade unions working together in campaigning for the Govan yard, and expresses total support for the Govan shipyard in bidding for current orders and future work.

Supported by: Mr John McAllion, Paul Martin, Mrs Mary Mulligan, Mr Duncan McNeil, Cathy Peattie, Trish Godman, Mr Kenneth Macintosh, Johann Lamont, Malcolm Chisholm, Cathie Craigie, Margaret Smith, Janis Hughes, Dr Richard Simpson, Rhoda Grant, Scott Barrie, Margaret Jamieson, Hugh Henry

S1M-1270 Michael Russell: Dere Street—That the Parliament notes the need to conserve, protect and exhibit the Roman Heritage of Scotland; expresses concern that the Scottish Executive has given permission for part of the Roman road, Dere Street, to be used by four wheel drive vehicles which is likely to lead to irreparable damage and loss of valuable artefacts, and congratulates the Antonine Guard Organisation on its continuing campaign on this and other matters such as the threat to the Cramond remains.

Supported by: Fiona McLeod, Colin Campbell, Shona Robison, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Roseanna Cunningham

S1M-1269# Ms Margo MacDonald: Safety on the Rail Network—That the Parliament resolves that, failing a favourable decision by Her Majesty's Government to turn its investment in rail infrastructure into an effective shareholding in Railtrack, the Scottish Executive should investigate how safety standards can be raised and maintained in Scotland’s rail network.

Supported by: Alex Neil, Robin Harper, Colin Campbell, Shona Robison, Brian Adam, Margaret Smith, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Donald Gorrie

S1M-1268# Nicola Sturgeon: Govan Shipyard—That the Parliament notes that a decision on the award of the contract to build roll-on-roll-off ferries for the Ministry of Defence is imminent; recognises that if the BAe Systems Govan shipyard is successful in its bid to secure this contract, work will be secured at the yard for up to five years; considers that the winning of the contract is essential to the long term future of the yard and expresses its wholehearted support for the Govan yard in its bid for the ro-ro order.

Supported by: Mr Andrew Welsh, Fergus Ewing, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Michael Russell, Roseanna Cunningham, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Bruce Crawford, Andrew Wilson, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Ms Margo MacDonald, Alex Neil, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Michael Matheson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Alex Salmond, Irene McGugan, Tricia Marwick, Tommy Sheridan, Fiona McLeod, Linda Fabiani, David McLetchie, Colin Campbell, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Shona Robison, Brian Adam R, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Mr David Davidson

S1M-1267 Tommy Sheridan: Rail Disasters—That the Parliament believes that, in the light of the recent rail disaster at Hatfield and the many others in recent years since privatisation of the industry, it is necessary to return the national rail network to public ownership and control in order to ensure that passenger safety is put before financial considerations, to restore public confidence and to resolve the fragmentation of the rail industry which is rendering attempts to address safety issues unnecessarily complicated.

Supported by: Dorothy-Grace Elder

S1M-1266# Andrew Wilson: OKI, Cumbernauld—That the Parliament notes with regret the recent job losses at the OKI electronic equipment plant in Cumbernauld which were a direct result of the high value of the pound and the failure of the UK to join the European Single Currency; congratulates the workforce of OKI on their excellent record of productivity and efficiency, and calls for all possible action to be taken by the UK Government to bring down the damagingly high rate of the pound and end the continuing harm that Scotland’s non-membership of the Euro is doing to Scottish jobs particularly in Scotland’s trading sector.

Supported by: Brian Adam, Christine Grahame, Linda Fabiani, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Colin Campbell, Fiona McLeod, Shona Robison, Margaret Smith, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Roseanna Cunningham, Tommy Sheridan*

S1M-1265# Mr Adam Ingram: School Milk—That the Parliament notes with concern that almost one third of children go to school without breakfast; recognises the importance of the provision of subsidised school milk in providing children with essential calories, vitamins, proteins and minerals; welcomes the decision by the EU to fund school milk at 75% of the target milk price; supports provision of the necessary top-up funding of an estimated £380,000 in Scotland to ensure the maintenance of the current level of subsidy for school milk in primary schools, and further calls for reintroduction of school milk in secondary schools in order to fulfil the Labour Party’s 1997 manifesto pledge.

Supported by: Dr Winnie Ewing, Ms Sandra White, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Adam Ingram, Brian Adam, Andrew Wilson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Christine Grahame, Linda Fabiani, Colin Campbell, Fiona McLeod, Shona Robison, Alex Neil, Alasdair Morgan, Nora Radcliffe, Tricia Marwick, Mrs Margaret Ewing*, Tommy Sheridan*

S1M-1264 Mr Kenneth Gibson: Scotland's Participation in Future Olympic Games—That the Parliament congratulates all British participants in the recent Sydney Olympic Games; is pleased that the number of gold medals won by the Great Britain team was the highest for 80 years; is aware that Cuba won the same number of gold medals as Britain, as did Romania, while the Netherlands won 12, despite these countries having less than a fifth, a third and a quarter of Great Britain’s population; realises that Great Britain came only thirtieth in terms of per capita success; believes that this is due to continued underfunding of sport relative to other countries, resulting for example in Britain having only eight Olympic sized swimming pools compared with 1,500 in Australia, which has a population only a third of the size of Britain’s; notes that the 199 countries participating excluded one of Europe’s oldest nations, Scotland; notes that while most national Olympic Committees are from nations, the International Olympic Committee also recognises independent territories, commonwealths, protectorates and geographical areas and that therefore, despite the Minister for Children and Education’s statement on 28 September 2000 (Official Report, col. 792-3), there is not necessarily only a single recognised Olympic committee for each independent nation state; is pleased that American Samoa, Aruba, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Cook Islands, Guam, Hong Kong, Netherlands Antilles, Palestine, Puerto Rico and US Virgin Islands all entered teams in the Olympics despite their non-independent status; recognises that Scotland competes in the cricket, football and rugby union world cups and Commonwealth Games in its own right; believes that Scotland should compete in the Athens and subsequent Olympic Games in its own right, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to work to that end.

Supported by: Ms Sandra White, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Adam Ingram, Irene McGugan, Andrew Wilson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Linda Fabiani, Colin Campbell, Fiona McLeod, Shona Robison, Alasdair Morgan

S1M-1263# George Lyon: Caledonian MacBrayne—That the Parliament recognises the high proportion of Caledonian MacBrayne employees who are drawn from the communities that the company serves; acknowledges the importance of these jobs to the economic well-being of these remote and island communities; notes with concern the fears that employees of Caledonian MacBrayne have regarding the potential consequences of the competitive tendering process required by the European Commission, and urges the Scottish Executive to do everything within its power to ensure that job security for staff at Caledonian MacBrayne is maintained throughout and after the conclusion of that process.

Supported by: Mr John Munro, Mr Jamie Stone, Mr Duncan McNeil, Linda Fabiani, Shona Robison, Margaret Smith, Nora Radcliffe

S1M-1262 Brian Adam: Aberdeen Sunday Car Parking Charges—That the Parliament regrets the recent decision by Aberdeen City Council to become the first council in Scotland to introduce charges for car parking on Sundays in parts of the City and calls upon Aberdeen City Council to reconsider this rather crude income generation scheme which will greatly inconvenience residents and their visitors.

Supported by: Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Adam Ingram, Irene McGugan, Andrew Wilson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Colin Campbell, Fiona McLeod, Shona Robison

S1M-1261 Euan Robson: Scottish Parliamentary Bursary—That the Parliament, rejoicing in Scotland’s artistic heritage, urges the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body to organise and fund, with sponsorship if appropriate, an annual Scottish Parliament bursary which would enable artists and historians to contribute to or interpret that heritage and which would mark the Scottish Parliament’s desire to enhance freedom of expression and creativity in Scotland.

Supported by: Michael Russell, Ian Jenkins, Ms Sandra White, Irene McGugan, Andrew Wilson, Linda Fabiani, Fiona McLeod, Shona Robison, Alasdair Morgan, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Roseanna Cunningham, Nora Radcliffe

S1M-1259 Tommy Sheridan: MMR Vaccine—That the Parliament notes the growing body of evidence which suggests a possible link between the triple measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccination and the increased incidence of autism and other disorders in children and calls upon the Scottish Executive to take the necessary steps to provide each of the three vaccines in separate doses, free of charge and on the NHS, as an alternative for those parents who request it for a five year period while further research is conducted into possible links between the MMR vaccine and autism in children.

Supported by: Fiona McLeod, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Ms Sandra White, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Adam Ingram, Irene McGugan, Christine Grahame, Linda Fabiani, Shona Robison

S1M-1258 Nick Johnston: Congratulations to Shirley Robertson—That the Parliament congratulates all Olympic medallists and extends special congratulations to Shirley Robertson from Menstrie in Clackmannanshire for winning the first ever gold medal for a British woman sailor and the first individual gold for a Scottish woman since 1920.

Supported by: Bill Aitken, Alex Fergusson, Irene McGugan, Christine Grahame, Phil Gallie, Mary Scanlon, Mr Keith Harding*

S1M-1257 Ms Margo MacDonald: Cannabis and the Scottish Criminal Justice System—That the Parliament calls upon the Scottish Executive, in consultation with the Parliament, to establish a Commission of experts and lay persons to examine and report on social and medical factors which might require changes to be made to Scots Law and the working of the Scottish criminal justice system in relation to the use of cannabis in Scotland.

Supported by: Donald Gorrie, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Christine Grahame, Linda Fabiani, Mr John Munro, Alex Neil, Kate MacLean, Margaret Smith, Nora Radcliffe

S1M-1256 Mr Jack McConnell: Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) Bill: Financial Resolution—That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) Bill, agrees to—

(a) the following expenditure payable out of the Scottish Consolidated Fund—

(i) the expenses of the Scottish Ministers in consequence of the Act; and

(ii) any increase attributable to the Act in the sums payable out of the Fund under or by virtue of any other enactment; and

(b) any payments made to the Scottish Ministers under the Act.

S1M-1255 Mr Gil Paterson: Review of Sex Offenders Act 1997—That the Parliament notes the commitment of the Scottish Executive to a joint review of the Sex Offenders Act 1997; asks the Executive to pursue such a review as a matter of priority and to provide regular reports to Parliament on the progress of that review, and further calls for the review to include provision for (a) Scottish child sex offenders with overseas convictions to be automatically registered within Scotland on their release from custody and (b) Scottish sex offenders who intend to travel overseas to register their travel plans and addresses while they are abroad.

Supported by: Tricia Marwick, Nora Radcliffe, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Michael Russell, Fiona McLeod, Brian Adam, Ms Sandra White, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Alex Fergusson, Irene McGugan, Andrew Wilson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Nicola Sturgeon, Shona Robison, Alex Neil, Phil Gallie, Margaret Smith, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh, Nick Johnston, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Mr Jamie Stone, Dennis Canavan, Tommy Sheridan, Ian Jenkins, Christine Grahame, Mrs Margaret Ewing*

S1M-1253# Dorothy-Grace Elder: Scots and Chronic Pain—That the Parliament is deeply concerned about the lack of funding and facilities for chronic pain alleviation in Scotland; wishes to move up the health agenda the suffering of those who endure chronic pain, bearing in mind the 500,000 Scots who suffer pain regularly and the immense strain this places upon them and their families; requests that an audit be carried out of the current level of provision in this area and of the availability of specialist consultants, nurses and physiotherapists, given that scarcities in these areas result in people in agony having to wait seven months for pain clinic appointments in some areas; wishes to see suffering from conditions such as back pain and arthritic pain given proper prominence; is extremely anxious concerning cancer patients, around 50% of whom are estimated not to have adequate pain relief; is also mindful of the stress caused to health professionals unable to help patients speedily due to the lack of resources and agrees that an entirely new outlook is needed.

Supported by: Christine Grahame, Nora Radcliffe, Donald Gorrie, Michael Russell, Fiona McLeod, Andrew Wilson, Shona Robison, Alex Neil, Margaret Smith, Mr Adam Ingram

S1M-1252 Fergus Ewing: Evaluation of Open Day—That the Parliament congratulates all staff involved in the organisation and conduct of the open day on 30 September 2000; believes that to have around 5,000 people visit the Parliament Chamber, Visitor Centre, Committee Rooms and other facilities indicates the success of both the event and the policy which enables an open approach to access for the public to our Parliament, and believes that, after analysis of this year’s event, it would be useful to repeat the open day and consider making it a more regular event.

Supported by: Colin Campbell, Andrew Wilson, Robin Harper, Christine Grahame, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Donald Gorrie, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Michael Russell, Fiona McLeod, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Linda Fabiani, Margaret Smith, Nora Radcliffe, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Mr Keith Harding*

S1M-1251# Mr Kenneth Gibson: Discrimination Against Teaching Centres of Artistic Excellence—That the Parliament notes the decision of the Department for Education and Employment to introduce Dance and Drama Awards for students to study at institutions in England and Wales; is aware that Scottish students compete on equal terms for places at such institutions with their counterparts from other parts of the United Kingdom and the European Union (EU); is concerned that tuition fees are only paid if students study in England and Wales and regrets that no parallel funding scheme exists for students who wish to study in Scotland; believes that this discrimination against Scottish institutions can only harm them and in the case of Ballet West may force it out of business or to relocate from Taynuilt to outwith Scotland, to the detriment of the local economy and employment; notes that Ballet West attracts students from across the United Kingdom, the EU and as far afield as Guatemala, Japan and Malaysia and outperforms competitor schools from south of the border in ballet competitions and quality of training; is puzzled by the Minister for Children and Education’s view that "there is no evidence of significant demand for Dance and Drama training for young people aged 16 and over in Scotland" when 613 applications were received by Ballet West for 23 places; regrets that 34 students withdrew or rejected offers from Ballet West due to lack of funding, compared with only two students doing so at English institutions; notes that the Excellence Fund supports and encourages talent secondary school dancers in Scotland but that the only progression into tertiary training encouraged by the Scottish Executive is in England; is concerned that Scotland will become denuded of teaching centres of artistic excellence and be drained of artistic talent as a result of this discrimination; believes the current position of the Scottish Executive on this issue contradicts its own cultural strategy that has as its key themes "widening opportunities, promoting education, developing and celebrating excellence" and believes that the Scottish Executive should act in order that students from across the UK can choose where to study dance, drama or stage management based on the quality of course offered rather than on whether or not tuition fees will be paid.

Supported by: Fergus Ewing, Fiona McLeod, Colin Campbell, Tricia Marwick, Shona Robison, Andrew Wilson, Robin Harper, Nora Radcliffe, Donald Gorrie, Michael Russell, Brian Adam, Irene McGugan, Ms Sandra White, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Alex Neil, Roseanna Cunningham, Mary Scanlon, Mr Duncan Hamilton

S1M-1250 Mr John Swinney: Release of Executive Documents Relating to the Examination Results Crisis—That the Parliament requires under the terms of section 23 of the Scotland Act 1998 that the Minister for Children and Education and Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning produce for the Education, Culture and Sport Committee and Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee all documents in their custody or under their control, including advice from civil servants to Ministers, concerning the Scottish Qualifications Authority and this year’s examination results crisis within 14 days of this resolution of the Parliament.

Supported by: Michael Russell, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Dennis Canavan, Christine Grahame, Nicola Sturgeon, Linda Fabiani, Roseanna Cunningham, Fiona McLeod, Fergus Ewing, Colin Campbell, Tricia Marwick, Mr Andrew Welsh, Shona Robison, Andrew Wilson, Robin Harper, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Ms Sandra White, Brian Adam, Irene McGugan, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Alasdair Morgan

S1M-1249 Ms Sandra White: Rector of Glasgow University—That the Parliament agrees that the position of Rector of Glasgow University is one that carries considerable responsibility as well as bestowing honour and dignity upon the holder of the post; notes with concern the views of many students of Glasgow University who are calling for the resignation of the current Rector Mr Ross Kemp, on the basis that he has failed in many of his Rectorial duties, including failing to give the freshers’ address in two successive years and to hold surgeries as promised, and therefore supports the students of Glasgow University and calls for his immediate resignation as Rector.

Supported by: Mr Kenneth Gibson, Fiona McLeod, Fergus Ewing, Colin Campbell, Shona Robison, Andrew Wilson, Nicola Sturgeon, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Michael Russell, Dr Winnie Ewing, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Linda Fabiani, Margaret Smith

S1M-1249.1 Robert Brown: Rector of Glasgow University—As an amendment to motion (S1M-1249) in the name of Ms Sandra White, leave out from "notes" to end and insert "recognises the importance of the independence of Scottish universities, of the academic and student bodies, and of the office of the Rectorship; notes that the Rector is elected by and is accountable to the student body and that Glasgow University Students’ Representative Council, as the student representative body, is taking action on the matter, and deplores the efforts of SNP politicians to interfere in the internal affairs of the University of Glasgow."

S1M-1248 Fiona McLeod: Macmillan Cancer Relief—That the Parliament congratulates Macmillan Cancer Relief on the tenth anniversary of their fundraising event "The Biggest Coffee Morning in the World"; further congratulates them on smashing their own record on 29 September 2000, the tenth anniversary of the first event; recognises the tremendous work that is carried out by doctors, nurses, carers and fundraisers across the country, and pledges to help them in their daily fight against cancer.

Supported by: Mr Kenneth Gibson, Fergus Ewing, Colin Campbell, Tricia Marwick, Shona Robison, Andrew Wilson, Robin Harper, Christine Grahame, Nora Radcliffe, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Ms Sandra White, Donald Gorrie, Michael Russell, Irene McGugan, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Linda Fabiani, Robert Brown, Margaret Smith, Mr David Davidson, Roseanna Cunningham, Mary Scanlon, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Mr Keith Harding*

S1M-1247 Mr Jamie Stone: Youth Hostels—That the Parliament congratulates the Youth Hostels Association and independent youth hostels for the opportunity they bring for many people who travel and welcomes the vital economic benefit which they contribute to the Scottish Tourist industry.

Supported by: Mr Kenneth Gibson, Fiona McLeod, Shona Robison, Andrew Wilson, Robin Harper, Nora Radcliffe, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Donald Gorrie, Linda Fabiani, Robert Brown, Alasdair Morgan, Margaret Smith, Mr David Davidson, Roseanna Cunningham, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Mr Keith Harding*

S1M-1246 Dorothy-Grace Elder: Lord Advocate's Reference in Trident Case—That the Parliament notes the decision of Sheriff Gimblett in October 1999 in the case of the "Trident Women", who were acquitted of causing malicious damage relating to the Trident Missile Programme on the basis that the women’s actions could be regarded as crime prevention through the disarmament of illegal and criminal weapons of mass destruction; further notes that a Lord Advocate’s Reference is being heard on related issues; expresses deep concern that in a case of such substantial public interest, proceedings will not be officially recorded; regrets that, as a consequence, there will be no official transcript available to the public or to the respondents; recognises that this may infringe European human rights law; notes further that the respondents will not be allowed audio recording to assist their own record-keeping in the light of the absence of an official record; questions the use of £100,000 of public money for the Lord Advocate’s Reference hearing, and calls for the official recording of the proceedings to take place.

Supported by: Dennis Canavan, Shona Robison, Nicola Sturgeon, Tommy Sheridan, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Fiona McLeod, Mr John McAllion, Linda Fabiani, Colin Campbell R, Andrew Wilson, Robin Harper, Ms Sandra White, Donald Gorrie, Michael Russell, Brian Adam, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Alex Neil, Margaret Smith

S1M-1245 Tommy Sheridan: Central Aberdeenshire Youth Advice Project—That the Parliament deplores the fact that Aberdeenshire Council has forced the closure of the Central Aberdeenshire Youth Advice Project by refusing a grant of £26,000 on 30 August 2000; recognises that the decision by the council will deny young people aged between 13 and 24, who have used this service for the last four years, the provision of confidential advice, information and support from qualified staff and fully trained volunteers on matters relating to drugs, teenage pregnancies, abortions, sexually transmitted diseases and other issues concerning young people, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to ask Aberdeenshire Council to review this decision urgently in order that services can continue to be provided to the young people affected.

Supported by: Fiona McLeod, Shona Robison, Andrew Wilson, Ms Sandra White

S1M-1244 Colin Campbell: Democracy in Azerbaijan—That the Parliament notes the efforts of those political parties in Azerbaijan which are working for the establishment of genuine democracy, with freedom of speech and fair elections free of corruption; supports those parties in their ongoing struggle, and deplores any measure that denies the electorate the right to vote for the party or individual of their choice.

Supported by: Roseanna Cunningham, Mr Jamie Stone, Tricia Marwick, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Mr Andrew Welsh, Michael Russell, Richard Lochhead, Fiona McLeod, Linda Fabiani, Shona Robison, Andrew Wilson, Robin Harper, Nora Radcliffe, Ms Sandra White, Donald Gorrie, Dr Winnie Ewing, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Alex Neil, Alasdair Morgan, Mr Keith Harding*

S1M-1243# John Scott: SSSI, SPA and SAC Designations—That the Parliament notes and expresses its concern at the significant increase in proposed designations of Sites of Special Scientific Interest, Special Protection Areas and Special Areas of Conservation made during the last year and covering more than 8% of Scotland’s landmass; asks the Scottish Executive to report to Parliament on the scientific basis for these designations; further asks the Executive to report on the findings of any consultations undertaken prior to designation, and believes that this issue should be debated in Parliament before these designations are finalised. R

Supported by: Mr Jamie McGrigor, Michael Russell, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh, David Mundell, Bill Aitken, Nick Johnston, John Young, Phil Gallie, Alex Fergusson, Irene McGugan, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Mr David Davidson, Mary Scanlon, Mr Keith Harding*

S1M-1243.1 Robin Harper: SSSI, SPA and SAC Designations—As an amendment to motion (S1M-1243) in the name of John Scott, leave out from "notes" to end and insert "welcomes the significant increase in proposed designation of Sites of Special Scientific Interest, Special Protection Areas (SPAs) and Special Areas of Conservation (SAC) made during the last year under Natura 2000 and covering more than 8% of Scotland’s landmass; notes that the position is modest when compared with, for example, Denmark which has over 22% of its land designated as SPAs and Finland where 14% of its land is proposed as an SAC; asks the Scottish Executive to confirm the scientific basis for these designations, which are selected according to European law; further notes that future European funding will be targeted at such Natura 2000 sites, and therefore regrets the relatively small designation rate in Scotland given our outstanding natural heritage and the opportunity to benefit from such European funding."

Supported by: Mr Kenneth Gibson

S1M-1242# Shona Robison: Community Care Services for Elderly People—That the Parliament notes with concern the loss of 30,000 home care hours since 1998 due to cutbacks in local government funding, making it more difficult for many elderly people to remain living at home; is further concerned about the 10,000 people awaiting an occupational therapy assessment for basic aids and adaptations; recognises the current postcode lottery which elderly people face when trying to access community care services, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to implement fully the recommendations of the report by the Royal Commission into Long Term Care in order to address the concerns about community care expressed by carers, voluntary organisations and elderly people themselves.

Supported by: Tommy Sheridan, Tricia Marwick, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Mr Andrew Welsh, Richard Lochhead, Fiona McLeod, Andrew Wilson, Robin Harper, Christine Grahame, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Ms Sandra White, Michael Russell, Brian Adam, Irene McGugan, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Alex Neil, Alasdair Morgan, Roseanna Cunningham, Mr Duncan Hamilton

S1M-1237 Mr Brian Monteith: British Olympic Success—That the Parliament extends its warmest congratulations to all members of the British Olympic Team, including the Scots in the team, on their success in the Sydney Olympics, winning a total of 28 medals, including eleven gold medals, and achieving a number of personal best performances; recognises that in many cases a contributory factor to the success of British competitors was funding for sports activities from the National Lottery, established by Prime Minister John Major, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to press the Chancellor of the Exchequer to use the ending of the Millennium Fund to return the share of lottery funding directed to sport, art, heritage and culture from its current 16.67% share to the 20% it enjoyed before the creation of the New Opportunities Fund.

Supported by: Alex Fergusson, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh, Mr Keith Harding, John Young, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Mr David Davidson, Bill Aitken, Ben Wallace, Alex Johnstone, Mr Murray Tosh, Donald Gorrie, Phil Gallie, Margaret Smith, Mary Scanlon

S1M-1236# Ms Sandra White: Glasgow and West Coast of Scotland Rail Infrastructure—That the Parliament agrees that the transport infrastructure of Glasgow and the West Coast of Scotland suffers from the lack of a direct rail link to Glasgow Airport and a Glasgow north/south rail link; notes that these interrelated schemes would bring benefits to all of Scotland, improving the rail accessibility of all parts of the country, and believes that the Scottish Executive should implement plans and make available the necessary funds for the development of these schemes.

Supported by: Mr Andrew Welsh, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Kay Ullrich, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Bruce Crawford, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Nicola Sturgeon, Robert Brown, Linda Fabiani, Tricia Marwick, Andrew Wilson, Robin Harper, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Donald Gorrie, Michael Russell, Fiona McLeod, Dr Winnie Ewing, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Alex Neil

S1M-1235 Angus MacKay: The Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Notification of Authorisations etc.) (Scotland) Order 2000—That the Justice and Home Affairs Committee recommends that the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Notification of Authorisations etc.) (Scotland) Order 2000 be approved.

S1M-1234 Pauline McNeill: Children's and Maternal Services at Yorkhill—That the Parliament notes Greater Glasgow Health Board’s decision to continue examination of the planning issues concerning future major investment in children’s services, further notes the clinical and structural case for retention of the child and maternal services at their existing site at Yorkhill, and urges the Health Board to invest in developing the existing buildings in order to ensure that the Royal Hospital for Sick Children at Yorkhill retains its unique services at the current site for the next 30 to 40 years.

Supported by: Mr Kenneth Gibson, Robert Brown, Mr Jamie Stone, Andrew Wilson, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Ms Sandra White, Michael Russell, Elaine Smith

S1M-1233# Christine Grahame: Day Care Centres—That the Parliament welcomes the Scottish Executive’s announcement that as many older people as possible should remain in their homes for as long as practicable; recognises the valuable contribution which day care centres throughout Scotland make to continued well being of older people and the insecurity which lack of funding can bring; notes the answer to question S1W-9571 by Iain Gray to Christine Grahame on 18 September 2000 that the Scottish Executive has no plans to make provision of day care services for older people a statutory duty; however, calls upon the Scottish Executive to legislate so that there is a specific statutory duty on local authorities to provide day care services, and further requires that it put in place appropriate funding mechanisms in order that day care centres can continue to provide and develop the services which individuals and local communities find essential to maintaining older people at home.

Supported by: Shona Robison, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Linda Fabiani, Andrew Wilson, Robin Harper, Nora Radcliffe, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Donald Gorrie, Michael Russell, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Fiona McLeod, Brian Adam, Irene McGugan, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Alex Neil, Alasdair Morgan, Margaret Smith, Roseanna Cunningham

S1M-1232# Dorothy-Grace Elder: Scottish Aid for Chinese Mining Disasters—That the Parliament is deeply upset that yet another mining catastrophe occurred in China on 27 September 2000, assures the people and government of China of the humanitarian concern of Scotland’s Parliament, expresses condolences to the families of more than one hundred miners who died in the southern-western Guizhou province; notes with alarm that 2730 Chinese miners died in accidents in mines during the first six months of 2000; calls upon Scottish-based mining safety experts, trade unionists and engineering firms to see if links can be made with the Chinese authorities to improve conditions in Chinese mines to the benefit of humankind and in the spirit of internationalism and ethical trade, and further urges that such persons and bodies get in touch without delay with the proposer, or signatories, of this motion as a first step to this end.

Supported by: Alex Neil, Roseanna Cunningham

S1M-1231 Mr Kenneth Gibson: The Possible Extinction of the Great Apes—That the Parliament notes with alarm the continued destruction of humankind’s closest relatives, the four species of great apes, the bonobo, chimpanzee, gorilla and orang-utan; notes that bonobo numbers alone have halved to 10,000 in only two years, bonobo sharing 98.4% of its DNA with Homo sapiens sapiens; notes that while chimpanzee numbers have plummeted from over two million to less than 180,000 in four decades, three of the five sub-species of gorilla, the Cross River, Bwindi and mountain, number only an estimated 150, 290 and 320 respectively and the two orang-utan sub-species 15,000 in total; is concerned that continued habitat destruction through deforestation, hunting for bushmeat and the pet trade, catching human diseases and fragmentation of habitat into small unsustainable areas could lead to extinction of all twelve sub-species of great ape within a generation; supports the 34 organisations of the Ape Alliance in their attempts to save the great apes, and seeks support from the Scottish Executive in calling upon Her Majesty's Government to increase conservation funding to poor countries, to assess aid projects to ensure they do not harm wildlife and to phase out the import of tropical timber not harvested in an environmentally friendly manner.

Supported by: Fergus Ewing, Bruce Crawford, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Shona Robison, Mr Jamie Stone, Fiona McLeod, Andrew Wilson, Robin Harper, Nora Radcliffe, Ms Sandra White, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Duncan Hamilton

S1M-1230 Nora Radcliffe: Voluntary Organisations for Disabled People—That the Parliament is committed to enabling disabled people to take control of their own lives and supports the work of the many voluntary organisations across Scotland, such as Leonard Cheshire Scotland, who work to break down discriminatory barriers and create opportunities for disabled people, promoting social inclusion.

Supported by: Dorothy-Grace Elder, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Alex Neil, Donald Gorrie, Christine Grahame, Maureen Macmillan, Fiona Hyslop, Shona Robison, Karen Whitefield, Elaine Smith, Trish Godman, Robert Brown, Rhoda Grant, Andrew Wilson, Robin Harper, Ms Sandra White, Michael Russell, Brian Adam, Irene McGugan, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Margaret Smith, Mary Scanlon

S1M-1229# Mr Andrew Welsh: Nuclear Testing Related Illnesses—That the Parliament recognises the possible correlation between participation in the UK’s Nuclear Test Programme in the 1950s and the development of subsequent illnesses; congratulates Dundee University on its progress toward the development of a new diagnostic procedure and management clinic for individuals exposed to injurious amounts of ionising radiation, and supports the University’s attempts to develop a centre of excellence to deal with the health hazards of long term and accidental radiation exposure.

Supported by: Michael Matheson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Colin Campbell, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Irene McGugan, Tricia Marwick, Alex Neil, Shona Robison, Donald Gorrie, Michael Russell, Brian Adam, Christine Grahame, Fiona Hyslop, Robert Brown, Tommy Sheridan, Ms Sandra White, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Fiona McLeod, Linda Fabiani, Andrew Wilson, Robin Harper, Nora Radcliffe, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Roseanna Cunningham

S1M-1227 Michael Russell: Health Visitors and Community Nurses—That the Parliament commends the dedication of health visitors and community nurses; recognises the difficulties they often face in having to carry heavy equipment some distance from their car to a patient’s home; urges NHS Trusts to compensate them fully for the use of their cars, which are essential to their work, in line with the proposals of the Deals on Wheels Campaign, and urges the Scottish Executive to institute a free parking badge system for community nurses and health visitors when visiting patients.

Supported by: Dorothy-Grace Elder, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Irene McGugan, Tricia Marwick, Alex Neil, Donald Gorrie, Brian Adam, Christine Grahame, Fiona Hyslop, Shona Robison, Nora Radcliffe, Tommy Sheridan, Ms Sandra White, Fiona McLeod, Linda Fabiani, Andrew Wilson, Robin Harper, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-1226# Shona Robison: 50th Anniversary of the Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees—That the Parliament acknowledges the 50th Anniversary of the Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, which has served as an important protection of refugees throughout the world; recognises that over the years this convention has made an invaluable contribution in setting the standards for the treatment of refugees, including their legal status, employment and welfare, and therefore joins together to acknowledge the pivotal role which the convention has played and to support its continuing role, which is fundamental to the maintenance and development of fair and just national and international refugee law.

Supported by: Linda Fabiani, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Malcolm Chisholm, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Irene McGugan, Tricia Marwick, Alex Neil, Donald Gorrie, Michael Russell, Brian Adam, Christine Grahame, Fiona Hyslop, Elaine Smith, Nora Radcliffe, Robert Brown, Ms Sandra White, Fiona McLeod, Andrew Wilson, Robin Harper, Dr Winnie Ewing, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Margaret Smith, Roseanna Cunningham

S1M-1224# Ms Margo MacDonald: Holyrood Project Ethical Employment Audit—That the Parliament resolves never to convene in a building constructed, finished or fitted out with materials purchased from countries in which conditions of employment and regulations regarding child labour differ markedly from our own in advance of a favourable outcome from an ethical employment audit carried out for the Scottish Parliament.

Supported by: Tommy Sheridan, Alex Neil, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Tricia Marwick, Donald Gorrie, Christine Grahame, Shona Robison, Ms Sandra White, Robin Harper, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-1223 Mr Brian Monteith: Closing the Millennium Dome—That the Parliament welcomes the fact that Ministers of Her Majesty's Government, including the Prime Minister, have now acknowledged that the Millennium Dome has been a financial disaster; notes that, following an initial grant of £399 million, a total of £628 million of public money has now been poured into this failed project, including an extra £43 million contributed in September 2000; recognises that the Minister responsible, Lord Falconer, should resign, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to make urgent representations to Her Majesty's Government to encourage it to move swiftly to close the Dome and have a full public inquiry into the whole of its accounts.

Supported by: Dorothy-Grace Elder, Mr Keith Harding, John Young, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Mr David Davidson, Bill Aitken, Alex Johnstone, Alex Fergusson, Phil Gallie

S1M-1221 Mr Michael McMahon: Steve Redgrave—That the Parliament notes the recent success of British Olympian Steve Redgrave; commends him on becoming the first Olympian to win gold at five successive Games in an endurance event; recognises his personal triumph in the face of illness, and sends warmest congratulations on behalf of the Scottish nation for bringing further sporting success to Britain.

Supported by: Phil Gallie, Irene McGugan, Donald Gorrie, Maureen Macmillan, Mr Brian Monteith, Karen Whitefield, Mrs Mary Mulligan, Trish Godman, Rhoda Grant, Robin Harper, Margaret Smith, Mr David Davidson, Mary Scanlon

S1M-1219# Dr Richard Simpson: Fife and Central Scotland Rail Link—That the Parliament notes the need for improved infrastructure connecting Fife to Central Scotland and supports the reopening of the Stirling, Alloa and Dunfermline rail link with the potential to link to the developing port of Rosyth.

Supported by: Scott Barrie, Dr Sylvia Jackson, Tommy Sheridan, Mr Keith Harding, Bruce Crawford, Donald Gorrie, Maureen Macmillan, Mr David Davidson, Elaine Smith, Nora Radcliffe, Mr Jamie Stone, Rhoda Grant, Tricia Marwick, Robin Harper, Ms Sandra White, Brian Adam, Mr Brian Monteith, Mr George Reid

S1M-1218# Margaret Jamieson: Tinnitus—That the Parliament notes that tinnitus affects around one in ten of the population, including an even higher proportion of older people; further notes that following advances in various therapies to counter its effects a pharmacological solution is now a real possibility, and urges the Scottish Executive to encourage appropriate research to this end by all means at its disposal.

Supported by: Dorothy-Grace Elder, Malcolm Chisholm, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Alex Neil, Donald Gorrie, Michael Russell, Christine Grahame, Maureen Macmillan, Shona Robison, Elaine Smith, Mrs Mary Mulligan, Trish Godman, Nora Radcliffe, Robert Brown, Mr Jamie Stone, Rhoda Grant, Tricia Marwick, Robin Harper, Ms Sandra White, Brian Adam, Mr Duncan McNeil, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Margaret Smith, Mary Scanlon

S1M-1214 Phil Gallie: Deportees and Application of Licence Conditions—That the Parliament urges the Scottish Executive to have talks as soon as possible with the Home Secretary with a view to introducing early legislation that will provide for parole licence conditions to be applied in the UK to UK citizen deportees who have been convicted of offences in other countries and which would demand that licence conditions be applied were the offences committed in the UK.

Supported by: Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Nick Johnston, Dennis Canavan, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Donald Gorrie, Mr Brian Monteith, Mr David Davidson

S1M-1210# Donald Gorrie: Misuse of Alcohol—That the Parliament agrees that everything possible should be done to ensure that alcohol abuse and the issues of health and violence arising from it receive greater attention, and urges the Executive to promote civilised social drinking and to reduce excessive and under age drinking through any means available, including administrative action, publicity, education and legislation.

Supported by: Dorothy-Grace Elder, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Nora Radcliffe, Mr Mike Rumbles, Euan Robson, Robert Brown, Alex Fergusson, Phil Gallie, Nick Johnston, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Alex Neil, Christine Grahame, Maureen Macmillan, Shona Robison, Mr David Davidson, Tavish Scott, Ian Jenkins, Mr Jamie Stone, Mr John Munro, George Lyon, Ms Sandra White, Robin Harper, Ms Margo MacDonald, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Margaret Smith

S1M-1209 Mr Jack McConnell: The Train Operating Companies (Rateable Values) (Scotland) (No2) Order 2000—That the Local Government Committee recommends that the draft Train Operating Companies (Rateable Values) (Scotland) (No 2) Order 2000 be approved.

S1M-1208# Alex Fergusson: Recognition of Pigeon Racing—That the Parliament congratulates the Scottish Homing Union (SHU) on the success of its "Millennium Race" and for drawing entries from all parts of the United Kingdom for this unique and innovative event, and urges sportscotland to give official recognition to the sport of pigeon racing in order to enable the SHU to have access to lottery and other funding for the further development of this traditional activity.

Supported by: Donald Gorrie, Alex Johnstone, Mr Murray Tosh, David Mundell, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Nick Johnston, Phil Gallie, David McLetchie, Mr Jamie McGrigor, Margaret Jamieson, Euan Robson, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh, John Scott, Dennis Canavan, Cathy Peattie, Mr Adam Ingram, Karen Whitefield, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Alex Neil, Mr Brian Monteith, Fiona Hyslop, Mr David Davidson, Nora Radcliffe, Mr Jamie Stone, Tricia Marwick, Dr Winnie Ewing, Mary Scanlon

S1M-1207 Nick Johnston: Global Citizenship in 2000 and Beyond—That the Parliament notes the success of the "Global Citizenship in 2000 and Beyond" conference held in Clackmannanshire, congratulates the Rector and staff of Alva Academy on hosting this conference which brought together school children from across Europe and South Africa, and urges the Executive to ensure that this biennial event receives support in bringing together young people from different cultures to share experiences and exchange ideas and their visions for the future.

Supported by: Dorothy-Grace Elder, Alex Fergusson, Mr Keith Harding, David Mundell, Michael Russell, Mr David Davidson, Nora Radcliffe, Andrew Wilson, Robin Harper

S1M-1206# Lord James Douglas-Hamilton: Abercorn Primary School West Lothian—That the Parliament registers its concern about the possible closure of Abercorn Primary School in West Lothian which provides a first class education to its pupils, notes the opposition expressed by the parents to the proposed closure by West Lothian Council and calls upon the Council to keep the school open.

Supported by: David McLetchie, Alex Johnstone, Alex Fergusson, Mr Keith Harding, David Mundell, Fiona Hyslop, John Scott, Nick Johnston, Bill Aitken, Michael Russell, Mr Brian Monteith, Mr David Davidson, Ms Sandra White, Robin Harper, Mr Jamie McGrigor, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Phil Gallie, Mary Scanlon

S1M-1204# Mr Keith Harding: Fife Council Education Overspend—That the Parliament expresses its concern over the projected £3.8 million overspend in Fife Council’s education budget and the measures being undertaken to address this situation, which include cutting the budget for secondary schools in the Kingdom and doubling charges to pupils for musical instrument tuition.

Supported by: Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh, Nick Johnston, Phil Gallie, Alex Fergusson, David McLetchie, Mr Jamie McGrigor, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, John Scott, Mr Brian Monteith, Mr David Davidson, Tricia Marwick, Mary Scanlon

S1M-1203# Mary Scanlon: National Eye Week—That the Parliament welcomes National Eye Week, beginning on 25 September, as a means of highlighting the importance of regular eye examinations and improving visual healthcare, particularly among the elderly, who are susceptible to macular degeneration; notes that more than nine out of ten primary eye examinations in Scotland are carried out by optometrists in the community; draws attention to the increasing partnership between ophthalmologists, general medical practitioners and optometrists in the co-management of eye diseases such as cataract, glaucoma and diabetic retinopathy; notes that such diseases can be ameliorated, provided that they are detected and treated early, and urges health boards and local healthcare co-operatives to devote sufficient resources to ensure that such co-management schemes are available in localities across the whole of Scotland.

Supported by: Alex Johnstone, Mr David Davidson, David Mundell, Mr Brian Monteith, David McLetchie, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Donald Gorrie, Alex Fergusson, Mr Keith Harding, Nora Radcliffe, Robert Brown, Phil Gallie, Nick Johnston, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Christine Grahame, Mr Jamie Stone, Robin Harper, Ms Sandra White, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Margaret Smith

S1M-1202 Mr Kenneth Gibson: Council Tax Collection—That the Parliament notes the content of Citizens Advice Scotland’s report Won’t Pay or Can’t Pay – The Real Cost of Scotland’s Council Tax Debt; is aware that administrative problems, such as delays in processing forms or sending out bills, billing errors and over-complicated forms result in a debt crisis for those on low incomes; realises that lack of communication between local authority departments and other agencies leads to delays in people receiving their entitlement to council tax benefit despite receiving related benefits such as housing benefit or income support; is concerned that the process of proceeding straight to formal debt collection without prior negotiation only increases overall indebtedness, making it harder for the debtor to make reasonable and affordable repayment plans; seeks from the Scottish Executive a commitment to work with local authorities to identify practical ways of preventing council debt occurring as a result of their own administrative processes, looking in particular at the ability to pay and the development of corporate debt strategies that will not make an individual’s debt worse, and calls for a debate on why many Scots are unable, rather than unwilling, to pay council tax debt.

Supported by: Dorothy-Grace Elder, Donald Gorrie, Irene McGugan, Fiona McLeod, Alex Neil, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Tricia Marwick, Michael Russell, Brian Adam, Christine Grahame, Fiona Hyslop, Shona Robison, Ms Sandra White, Andrew Wilson, Robin Harper, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-1202.1 Tommy Sheridan: Council Tax Collection—As an amendment to motion (S1M-1202) in the name of Mr Kenneth Gibson, insert at end " and further calls upon the Scottish Executive to abolish the discredited and deeply unfair council tax and replace it with the income-based local government tax, the Scottish Service Tax."

S1M-1201 Nick Johnston: Business AM—That the Parliament congratulates Business AM on its first edition and, in welcoming this new paper, applauds the extension of choice for newspaper readers in Scotland.

Supported by: Mr Brian Monteith, David Mundell, Fergus Ewing, Alex Fergusson, Euan Robson, Cathy Peattie, Phil Gallie, Mr Adam Ingram, Alex Neil, Michael Russell, Brian Adam, Christine Grahame, Tricia Marwick, Andrew Wilson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mary Scanlon

S1M-1200 Nick Johnston: British American Tobacco—That the Parliament notes with alarm the allegations made on 20 September 2000 on Good Morning Scotland that British American Tobacco marketing teams have been targeting children in Africa by offering them free cigarettes, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to press the relevant departments of Her Majesty’s Government to bring pressure to bear on tobacco companies to cease this abhorrent practice and to support the move towards international regulation of tobacco marketing.

Supported by: David Mundell, Tommy Sheridan, Donald Gorrie, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Robert Brown, Cathy Peattie, Phil Gallie, Mr Adam Ingram, Alex Neil, Brian Adam, Christine Grahame, Shona Robison, Mr David Davidson, Nora Radcliffe, Robin Harper, Ms Sandra White, Mary Scanlon

S1M-1199# Pauline McNeill: Breast Cancer Awareness—That the Parliament notes that October is Breast Cancer Awareness month and undertakes to do all it can to raise awareness of breast cancer throughout Scotland during this period.

Supported by: David Mundell, Tommy Sheridan, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Donald Gorrie, Trish Godman, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Irene McGugan, Mr Keith Harding, Des McNulty, Nora Radcliffe, Tavish Scott, Fiona McLeod, Alex Neil, Margaret Jamieson, Robert Brown, Cathy Peattie, Phil Gallie, Mr Kenneth Macintosh, Mr Adam Ingram, Malcolm Chisholm, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Michael Russell, Christine Grahame, Maureen Macmillan, Fiona Hyslop, Shona Robison, Karen Whitefield, Mr David Davidson, Elaine Smith, Mrs Mary Mulligan, Ms Sandra White, Rhoda Grant, Tricia Marwick, Andrew Wilson, Robin Harper, Ms Margo MacDonald, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Margaret Smith, Mary Scanlon

S1M-1198# Nick Johnston: Job Losses at Inveresk Group—That the Parliament calls the attention of the Scottish Ministers to job losses at Inveresk Group in Inverkeithing and Alloa and believes that the Scottish Executive Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Department should take action to ensure the continued operation of the paper making industry in Scotland.

Supported by: Mr Keith Harding, Mr Brian Monteith, David Mundell, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Donald Gorrie, Alex Fergusson, David McLetchie, Phil Gallie, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Bruce Crawford, Mr David Davidson, Nora Radcliffe, Tricia Marwick, Robin Harper, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mary Scanlon

S1M-1194 Phil Gallie: Summary Warrants—That the Parliament condemns South Ayrshire Council for serving Summary Warrants on Council Tax payers, particularly those who are elderly, disabled and vulnerable, for being nothing other than a few days late in making their regular monthly payments.

Supported by: John Scott, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Alex Neil, Mr Brian Monteith, Michael Russell, Christine Grahame, Ms Sandra White

S1M-1194.1 Tommy Sheridan: Summary Warrants—As an amendment to motion (S1M-1194) in the name of Phil Gallie, insert at end "hopes that the Conservative group of MSPs will now reverse their opposition to the abolition of poindings and warrant sales and believes that poindings and warrant sales should be scrapped by 1 April 2001."

Supported by: Alex Neil, Mr Adam Ingram, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Michael Russell, Brian Adam, Christine Grahame, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-1193 Mr Keith Harding: Local Government Strike Action—That the Parliament expresses its concern over the continued strike action due to a dispute over pay affecting local government services and notes that enough money would be available to meet wage demands if Her Majesty’s Government had not abolished advance corporation tax credit for pension funds in July 1997, a change which is costing Scottish councils £20.5 million each year, and if Scottish local authorities were to improve their council tax collection rates so that they were on a par with their counterparts south of the border, which would generate an extra £70 million each year.

Supported by: Mr Brian Monteith, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh, Alex Johnstone, Mr Murray Tosh, Phil Gallie, Alex Fergusson, David McLetchie, Mr Jamie McGrigor, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, John Scott, Nick Johnston, Mary Scanlon

S1M-1192 Mr Murray Tosh: Report by the Auditor General into the Holyrood Project—That the Parliament notes the report by the Auditor General for Scotland, Robert Black, The new Scottish Parliament building – An examination of the management of the Holyrood project, and calls upon the Parliamentary Bureau to timetable an immediate session of oral questions to the Presiding Officer to allow MSPs to exercise appropriate scrutiny of the Holyrood Project and to timetable further sessions as and when required during the remainder of the procurement period.

Supported by: Roseanna Cunningham, Alex Fergusson, Mr Brian Monteith, David Mundell, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Donald Gorrie, John Scott, Mr Keith Harding, David McLetchie, Mr Jamie McGrigor, Phil Gallie, Mr David Davidson, Nora Radcliffe, Ms Margo MacDonald, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Mary Scanlon

S1M-1191# Shona Robison: Eniola Adewale—That the Parliament notes with concern the refusal by the Home Office to approve asylum status for Nigerian refugee Eniola Adewale given that the Home Secretary, Jack Straw, is unable to guarantee Mr Adewale’s safety if he returns to Nigeria; recognises the evidence presented to MSPs in June by Mr Adewale and others on their experience as refugees in Scotland; deplores any influence that this evidence may have had on the outcome of Mr Adewale’s asylum application, and supports the campaign to prevent the deportation of Mr Adewale after his appeal hearing of 23 September.

Supported by: Malcolm Chisholm, Fiona Hyslop, Ms Sandra White, Linda Fabiani, Tommy Sheridan, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Donald Gorrie, Fergus Ewing, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Irene McGugan, Andrew Wilson, Nora Radcliffe, Fiona McLeod, Robert Brown, Tricia Marwick, Alex Neil, Michael Russell, Elaine Smith, Robin Harper, Ms Margo MacDonald

S1M-1190 Mr Lloyd Quinan: CAB Inverclyde—That the Parliament congratulates Citizens Advice Scotland on their plans for a Citizens Advice Bureau to be developed in Inverclyde, in co-operation and collaboration with all other existing services, with the key aim of improving social inclusion opportunities throughout the community of Inverclyde.

Supported by: Fiona McLeod, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Fergus Ewing, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Andrew Wilson, Alex Neil, Kay Ullrich, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Robert Brown, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Gil Paterson, Tricia Marwick, Brian Adam, Christine Grahame, Fiona Hyslop, Shona Robison, Ms Sandra White, Robin Harper, Dr Winnie Ewing, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-1189# Mr Adam Ingram: Mental Health Carers—That the Parliament congratulates Trust: A Carers Connection on its campaigning for the rights of carers of the mentally ill in Ayrshire; recognises the specific needs of these carers; believes that the rights of carers of people with mental illness should be at least the same as those of other carers, particularly in relation to consultation over care issues concerning the patient, and acknowledges the invaluable work carried out by these carers.

Supported by: Dorothy-Grace Elder, Ms Sandra White, Tommy Sheridan, Fiona McLeod, Christine Grahame, David Mundell, Michael Russell, Fiona Hyslop, Donald Gorrie, Shona Robison, Fergus Ewing, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Irene McGugan, Andrew Wilson, Phil Gallie, Alex Neil, Mr Jamie McGrigor, John Scott, Roseanna Cunningham, Mr Gil Paterson, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Mr David Davidson, Nora Radcliffe, Mary Scanlon, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Tricia Marwick, Robin Harper, Ms Margo MacDonald, Dr Winnie Ewing, Ian Jenkins, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-1188# Mrs Mary Mulligan: Sydney Paralympics and Olympic Games—That the Parliament congratulates the Scottish Paralympians and Olympians on their success at the being selected for the Sydney games and congratulates the teams on their success in Australia.

Supported by: David Mundell, Shona Robison, Pauline McNeill, Donald Gorrie, Trish Godman, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Nora Radcliffe, Fiona McLeod, Mr Brian Monteith, Margaret Jamieson, Cathy Peattie, Mr Gil Paterson, Alex Neil, Michael Russell, Brian Adam, Maureen Macmillan, Dr Sylvia Jackson, Irene McGugan, Karen Whitefield, Mr David Davidson, Tricia Marwick, Mr Jamie Stone, Ms Sandra White, Hugh Henry, Allan Wilson, Mr Kenneth Macintosh, Mr Duncan McNeil, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Rhoda Grant, Mike Watson, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-1187 Linda Fabiani: Third World Debt—That the Parliament notes the sentiment of motion S1M-1154; further notes that the world’s most powerful leaders have failed to deliver on promises of debt cancellation made at last year’s summit in Cologne, and urges the creditors at the International Monetary Fund and World Bank meetings in Prague during September 2000 to agree to stop taking payments from the poorest countries immediately, to commit to the cancellation of 100% of the debt of all the poorest countries by their creditors and to set in process a fair and transparent new mechanism for dealing with debt and lending.

Supported by: Michael Matheson, Roseanna Cunningham, Andrew Wilson, Mr Andrew Welsh, Ms Sandra White, Colin Campbell, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Bruce Crawford, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Kay Ullrich, Christine Grahame, Fiona McLeod, Alex Neil, Tricia Marwick, Mr John Swinney, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Gil Paterson, Alasdair Morgan, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Michael Russell, Fiona Hyslop, Shona Robison, Robin Harper, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Irene McGugan, Brian Adam, Robert Brown, Donald Gorrie, Fergus Ewing, Cathy Peattie, Phil Gallie, Mr Adam Ingram, Nora Radcliffe, Mr Jamie Stone, Richard Lochhead, Ms Margo MacDonald, Nicola Sturgeon

S1M-1186 Ben Wallace: Orderly Conduct of Fuel Protestors—That the Parliament commends the hauliers and farmers who have recently protested at Grangemouth and elsewhere in Scotland about fuel taxes for the orderly and responsible conduct of their protests and urges Her Majesty’s Government to address the concerns that have been expressed as a matter of priority.

Supported by: Dorothy-Grace Elder, Alex Johnstone, David Mundell, Mr David Davidson, Fergus Ewing, Alex Fergusson, Phil Gallie, Nick Johnston, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Brian Adam, Mary Scanlon

S1M-1183 Tommy Sheridan: Eniola Adewale—That the Parliament believes that the recent removal of Nigerian asylum seeker Eniola Adewale to Leicester and the subsequent rejection of his application for asylum was due to the fact that he has consistently campaigned in Scotland for decent living conditions for asylum seekers and against the climate of racism, abuse and ignorance confronting asylum seekers; believes that the treatment Eniola has received amounts to an abuse of human rights and his freedom of expression and an abuse of Scottish hospitality; calls upon the Home Secretary to revoke his rejection of Eniola Adewale’s application for asylum immediately on the grounds that his deportation to Nigeria constitutes a grave risk to his life and liberty, and agrees to support Eniola’s appeal against deportation.

Supported by: Dorothy-Grace Elder, Pauline McNeill, Nora Radcliffe, Alex Neil, Elaine Smith

S1M-1182# Johann Lamont: Erection of Mobile Phone Mast in Traquair Drive, Glasgow—That the Parliament supports the efforts of the residents of Traquair Drive in the Glasgow Pollok constituency to get British Telecom to stop work on the erection of a mobile phone mast on the BT building in Traquair Drive until meaningful consultation with local residents is carried out; believes that such consultation should address the serious concerns of local people about the health risks, particularly to children, posed by such a mast; notes the inadequacy of current legislation in this area, and requests the Scottish Executive to bring forward changes to this legislation as a matter of urgency.

Supported by: Tommy Sheridan, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Malcolm Chisholm, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Ms Sandra White, Pauline McNeill, Robert Brown, Donald Gorrie, Trish Godman, Des McNulty, Maureen Macmillan, Elaine Smith, Nora Radcliffe, Mr Jamie Stone, Rhoda Grant, Robin Harper, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-1181 Nick Johnston: Transport Policy Adding Costs to Business—That the Parliament notes that the Scottish Executive’s transport policy is adding excessive costs to businesses, is failing to move heavy loads on to rail and is causing major damage to the road network.

Supported by: David Mundell, Alex Fergusson, Mr David Davidson, David McLetchie, Mr Brian Monteith, Mary Scanlon

S1M-1179 Christine Grahame: Barlinnie and Overcrowding—That the Parliament notes the evidence of Her Majesty’s Chief Inspector of Prisons for Scotland to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee on 11 September 2000 in speaking to his Annual Report, further notes his concerns regarding Barlinnie Prison, namely the highest level of overcrowding in Scotland (currently 17.5%), the conditions for prisoners on remand, the further 12 month postponement of the end of "slopping out", and the failure to reopen "B" Hall, itself half the size of some prisons in Scotland; acknowledges his view that "For reasons of safety and decency there must be change. The problems at Barlinnie have gone on for long enough", and therefore calls upon the Scottish Executive as a matter of urgency to respond to his concerns.

Supported by: Mr Kenneth Gibson, Linda Fabiani, Fiona McLeod, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Andrew Wilson, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Ms Sandra White, Tommy Sheridan, Michael Russell, Fiona Hyslop, Shona Robison, Robin Harper, Donald Gorrie, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Alex Neil, Phil Gallie, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Gil Paterson, Tricia Marwick, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-1174# Fiona Hyslop: Prevention of Home Accidents—That the Parliament recognises that approximately 272 deaths in Scotland were as a result of accidents in the home in 1999; recognises that there is a need for a Home Safety Act which places statutory duty on local authorities to investigate accidents within their areas and provide a reasonable level of soundly based education and advice for the public, and considers that it is essential that this duty is properly funded in relation to the accident cost borne by the public purse in each area.

Supported by: Tricia Marwick, Alex Neil, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Christine Grahame, Shona Robison, Linda Fabiani, Ms Margo MacDonald, Fiona McLeod, Andrew Wilson, Ms Sandra White, Michael Russell, Robin Harper, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Robert Brown, Donald Gorrie, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Nora Radcliffe, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-1173 Maureen Macmillan: Prostate Cancer Awareness Week—That the Parliament notes that 11 to 16 September 2000 is Prostate Cancer Awareness Week and recognises the important contribution made by voluntary groups who seek to make people aware of the dangers of prostate cancer.

Supported by: Dorothy-Grace Elder, Shona Robison, Linda Fabiani, Mr Kenneth Macintosh, Trish Godman, Mr Keith Harding, Andrew Wilson, Ms Sandra White, David Mundell, Michael Russell, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Pauline McNeill, Donald Gorrie, Dr Richard Simpson, Des McNulty, Nora Radcliffe, Alex Neil, Mrs Mary Mulligan, Dennis Canavan, Karen Whitefield, Mr Jamie Stone, Fiona McLeod, Rhoda Grant, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Mary Scanlon

S1M-1172 Donald Gorrie: Democratic Accountability of Non-Departmental Public Bodies—That the Parliament invites the Parliamentary Bureau to arrange for a full debate and vote on a motion that the Parliament should set up a thorough enquiry into how to make Non-Departmental Public Bodies democratically accountable.

Supported by: Fergus Ewing, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Dr Winnie Ewing, Christine Grahame, Shona Robison, Linda Fabiani, Mike Watson, Mr Andrew Welsh, Mr Jamie McGrigor, Mr John Munro, Andrew Wilson, Ms Sandra White, Robin Harper, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Robert Brown, David Mundell, Nora Radcliffe, Tavish Scott, Alex Neil, Euan Robson, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Mike Rumbles, Ian Jenkins, Mr Jamie Stone, Fiona McLeod, Ms Margo MacDonald, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Margaret Smith, Mary Scanlon

S1M-1171# Alex Fergusson: Waiver of Groundwater Maintenance Charge—That the Parliament notes that the annual groundwater maintenance charge has been waived for sheep farmers in England and Wales and believes that the Scottish Environment Protection Agency should waive its charge in order to eliminate the competitive disadvantage which is currently borne by Scotland’s farmers. R

Supported by: Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Mr Jamie McGrigor, Bill Aitken, David McLetchie, John Scott, Mr Murray Tosh, David Mundell, Phil Gallie, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Nick Johnston, Dr Winnie Ewing, Alex Johnstone, George Lyon, Mr Brian Monteith, Mr Keith Harding, Christine Grahame, Mr David Davidson, Nora Radcliffe, Tavish Scott, Alasdair Morgan, Euan Robson, Mr Adam Ingram, Ms Sandra White, Richard Lochhead, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mary Scanlon

S1M-1170# Richard Lochhead: Assisting the Fishing Industry with Fuel Costs—That the Parliament requests the Scottish Executive to publish urgently a package of funded measures to assist the fishing industry in the North-East and throughout Scotland to cope with fuel costs which have risen in recent months; notes that the catching sector is fuel dependent and therefore disproportionately disadvantaged; recognises that the impact on the sector is particularly widespread given that the wages of share fishermen are suffering as a result of the rise in fuel costs, and further urges Ministers to convene a meeting of the oil companies, energy experts and industry representatives to explore ways in which the industry can be assisted.

Supported by: Brian Adam, Shona Robison, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Christine Grahame, Linda Fabiani, Andrew Wilson, Ms Sandra White, Fiona McLeod, Michael Russell, Fiona Hyslop, Irene McGugan, Alex Neil, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-1169 Tommy Sheridan: Provision of Beta Interferon to MS Sufferers—That the Parliament calls upon the Minister for Health and Community Care to ensure that beta interferon is made available on the NHS to MS sufferers all over Scotland in order to provide them with the highest levels of MS care.

Supported by: Shona Robison, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Christine Grahame, Andrew Wilson, Ms Sandra White, Michael Russell, Donald Gorrie, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Alex Neil, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Elaine Smith, Fiona McLeod, Tricia Marwick, Robin Harper, Ms Margo MacDonald

S1M-1168 Mr Lloyd Quinan: MMR Vaccine and Autism—That the Parliament notes the new evidence from Professor Vijendra Singh of Utah State University linking the combined measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine with the increase in cases of Autistic Spectrum Disorder, and in the light of this evidence, calls for a moratorium on the use of the MMR combined vaccine and the provision of sufficient supplies of the single vaccinations to meet requirements.

Supported by: Mrs Margaret Ewing, Bruce Crawford, Shona Robison, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Dr Winnie Ewing, Christine Grahame, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Elaine Smith, Andrew Wilson, Ms Sandra White, Tommy Sheridan, Robin Harper, Irene McGugan, Alex Neil, Fiona McLeod

S1M-1162 David Mundell: Exam Crisis—That the Parliament recognises the enormous effort to date put in by teachers, headteachers and school office staff across Scotland to help and support pupils following this summer’s exam crisis and offers its thanks to all those involved.

Supported by: Mr Murray Tosh, Phil Gallie, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh, Mr Brian Monteith, Alex Fergusson, Mr Keith Harding, Mr David Davidson, Nick Johnston, John Scott, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Donald Gorrie, Des McNulty, Nora Radcliffe, David McLetchie, Mr Jamie McGrigor, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Tricia Marwick, Mary Scanlon

S1M-1161# Mr Kenneth Gibson: Trafficking of Women—That the Parliament expresses its deep concern at the trafficking of an estimated 300,000 young women into Central Europe and the European Union (EU) each year; is alarmed that hundreds of these women are murdered and thousands are coerced into debt bondage and prostitution; notes that false promises of legitimate employment and a better life are used by smuggling gangs to lure women from communities submerged in desperate poverty; calls for a common penalty for trafficking to be adopted across the EU; recognises the need to provide additional resources for the United Nations body The International Organisation for Migration for its campaign to educate women and girls on the risks of trafficking and to provide medical and psychiatric help, witness protection and safe houses for those fleeing pimps, and acknowledges that the problem of trafficking can only be solved by addressing the disproportionate impact of poverty on women in the former Soviet Union which feeds the supply of this traffic in human misery.

Supported by: Shona Robison, Fiona McLeod, Fergus Ewing, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Donald Gorrie, Irene McGugan, Christine Grahame, Tricia Marwick, Andrew Wilson, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Colin Campbell, Michael Russell, Linda Fabiani, Tommy Sheridan, Ms Margo MacDonald, Mr Adam Ingram, Ms Sandra White, Nora Radcliffe, Alex Neil, Phil Gallie, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-1160# Elaine Smith: Permitted Telecommunications Developments—That the Parliament expresses its concern over the proliferation of "permitted development" notices which local authorities have received on behalf of telecommunications companies since the report of the Transport and the Environment Committee on telecommunications developments; views the inability of local authorities to control the siting of these "permitted developments" as a temporary loophole in the planning process and asks that the telecommunications companies involved, specifically those who have served notices to erect three masts near Stepps Primary School in the Coatbridge & Chryston constituency, conduct meaningful consultation with the local communities affected on the siting of these masts and, where agreement cannot be reached, impose a voluntary moratorium on their siting until such times as new planning legislation is brought forward.

Supported by: Tommy Sheridan, Fergus Ewing, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Donald Gorrie, Christine Grahame, Rhoda Grant, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Michael Russell, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Johann Lamont, Linda Fabiani, Mr Kenneth Macintosh, Trish Godman, Dr Sylvia Jackson, Mrs Mary Mulligan, Malcolm Chisholm, Ms Sandra White, Fiona Hyslop, Pauline McNeill, Dr Richard Simpson, Nora Radcliffe, Tavish Scott, Alex Neil, Margaret Jamieson, Euan Robson, Mr Gil Paterson, Maureen Macmillan, Robin Harper, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-1156# Tavish Scott: Common Fisheries Policy Reform and Zonal Management—That the Parliament recognises the importance to Shetland of its fishing industry which supports vital employment in the fish catching, processing and ancillary sectors; notes that to provide a stable future a complete review of fisheries conservation and management policies is urgently needed, and commends to the Scottish Executive the proposals for zonal management put forward by the Scottish Fishermen’s Federation.

Supported by: Donald Gorrie, Nora Radcliffe, Euan Robson, Mr Jamie Stone

S1M-1155 Michael Russell: Greenwich Dome—That the Parliament condemns the profligate waste of public money on the Greenwich Dome; calls upon the Scottish Executive to make urgent representations to Her Majesty's Government and the National Lottery authorities in support of an immediate moratorium on any future funding and the immediate closure of the Dome, and notes that this ill conceived and wasteful project has been constantly opposed by the majority of Scots since its inception and that the effect of its vast lottery funding has been to cruelly deprive numerous good causes of desperately needed financial support.

Supported by: Shona Robison, Fiona McLeod, Tommy Sheridan, Fergus Ewing, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Donald Gorrie, Irene McGugan, Christine Grahame, Tricia Marwick, Brian Adam, Andrew Wilson, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Colin Campbell, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Linda Fabiani, Mr Andrew Welsh, Ms Sandra White, Fiona Hyslop, Alex Neil, Alasdair Morgan, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-1154 Des McNulty: Third World Debt—That the Parliament notes the widespread support amongst the people of Scotland for the Jubilee 2000 Campaign to cancel unpayable Third World Debt; appreciates that the Chancellor of the Exchequer and the Secretary of State for International Development have led the way in moves for debt relief, and urges the international community to set an accelerated timetable at the IMF/World Bank meeting in Prague for releasing the world’s heavily indebted poor countries from the burden of debt repayments, while ensuring that the benefits of debt relief reach the poor.

Supported by: Mike Watson, Helen Eadie, Marilyn Livingstone, Dr Sylvia Jackson, Trish Godman, Hugh Henry, Bristow Muldoon, Robin Harper, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Donald Gorrie, Christine Grahame, Rhoda Grant, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Fiona Hyslop, Mr Kenneth Macintosh, Mr Duncan McNeil, Dr Elaine Murray, Cathy Jamieson, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Robert Brown, Scott Barrie, Mr Michael McMahon, Ms Margaret Curran, Johann Lamont, Mr George Reid, Pauline McNeill, Dr Winnie Ewing, Tommy Sheridan, Tricia Marwick, Mrs Mary Mulligan, Elaine Smith, Cathy Peattie, Ian Jenkins, Malcolm Chisholm, Maureen Macmillan, Euan Robson, Dennis Canavan, Mr John McAllion, Tavish Scott, George Lyon, Irene McGugan, Dr Richard Simpson, Nora Radcliffe, Mr Mike Rumbles, Alex Neil, Margaret Jamieson, Allan Wilson, Lewis Macdonald, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Karen Whitefield, Mr Murray Tosh, Elaine Thomson, Fiona McLeod, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mary Scanlon

S1M-1154.1 Phil Gallie: Third World Debt—As an amendment to motion (S1M-1154) in the name of Des McNulty, leave out "led" and insert "continued the good work commenced by the last Government in leading".

Supported by: John Scott, David Mundell, David McLetchie, Mr David Davidson, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton

S1M-1153# Bruce Crawford: Gulf War Related Illnesses—That the Parliament notes the continuing concern being expressed by veterans of the Gulf War that multiple vaccines given to Gulf War troops, oil-fire related pollution, depleted uranium used in shells and possible pollution from destroyed Iraqi chemical and biological weapon sites may be responsible for the illnesses known as Gulf War related illnesses; further notes the evidence from the British Medical Journal and research undertaken by the Gulf War Research Unit at Kings College, London to this effect, and asks the Scottish Executive to ensure that each NHS health board, Trust and local authority is provided with appropriate advice and guidance recognising the existence of the "related illnesses" and instructing them to ensure that proper and adequate resources are allocated to improving the quality of life for those Gulf War veterans who are affected by Gulf War related illnesses.

Supported by: Shona Robison, Fiona McLeod, Tommy Sheridan, Fergus Ewing, Bruce Crawford, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Donald Gorrie, Irene McGugan, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Christine Grahame, Brian Adam, Andrew Wilson, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Colin Campbell, Michael Russell, Mr Andrew Welsh, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Robert Brown, Linda Fabiani, Ms Sandra White, Fiona Hyslop, Nora Radcliffe, Alex Neil, Tricia Marwick, Robin Harper, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-1152# Mr Kenneth Gibson: Ending EU Tobacco Subsidies—That the Parliament condemns the continuing European Union (EU) subsidy of some £800 million annually to tobacco growers; notes that this is in stark contrast to the tiny sums spent on EU smoking prevention initiatives of £1.2 million per annum; believes that EU tobacco subsidies are a gross misuse of public funds and reflect a fundamental contradiction to EU public health policy; notes that tobacco subsidies have failed in their original intention of encouraging farmers to grow commercially valued varieties of tobacco and thus reduce imports, as EU grown tobacco is of poor quality and low commercial value; recognises that almost all EU grown tobacco is exported to Central and Eastern Europe and developing countries where there are insufficient controls on tar content; notes that 10-20 million people could be fed by food crops grown instead of tobacco, and believes that the EU should begin a phased removal of all tobacco subsidies, using the money thus saved to give farmers direct income support while encouraging crop diversification, early retirement and other safety net schemes.

Supported by: Christine Grahame, Robin Harper, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Bruce Crawford, Bristow Muldoon, Donald Gorrie, Tricia Marwick, Brian Adam, Andrew Wilson, Dr Richard Simpson, Colin Campbell, Robert Brown, Tommy Sheridan, Ms Sandra White, Fiona McLeod, Mr Brian Monteith, Fergus Ewing, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Des McNulty, Tavish Scott, Alex Neil, Alasdair Morgan, Maureen Macmillan, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-1150# Donald Gorrie: 0345 Phone Number for the Parliament—That the Parliament, in order to give people throughout Scotland access to it by telephone at the same local call charge, considers that the existence of its 0845 number as an option for phoning its exchange should be publicised more vigorously, and requests the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body to examine whether the Parliament should go over to an 0345 or 0845 number so that all calls to it are at the local call rate.

Supported by: Shona Robison, Fergus Ewing, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Robin Harper, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Irene McGugan, Christine Grahame, Andrew Wilson, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Michael Russell, Tommy Sheridan, Ms Margo MacDonald, Mr Adam Ingram, Ms Sandra White, David Mundell, Nora Radcliffe, Tavish Scott, Euan Robson, Mr Gil Paterson, Ben Wallace, Maureen Macmillan, Mr Jamie Stone, Fiona McLeod, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mary Scanlon

S1M-1146 Mr Alex Salmond: School Transport in Aberdeenshire—That the Parliament supports the efforts of action groups established by parents across Aberdeenshire in response to the decision by the Liberal Democrat/Independent council administration to withdraw free school transport in certain areas; condemns the disgraceful decision by the Liberal Democrat/Independent administration which will see children’s lives put at risk due to the lack of safe routes to school; deplores the council’s use of police resources to collect bus fares from children who, in many instances, genuinely cannot afford the fares, and calls upon the Liberal Democrat council leader to reverse this ill-conceived decision.

Supported by: Kay Ullrich, Richard Lochhead, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Bruce Crawford, Mr Andrew Welsh, Shona Robison, Fiona McLeod, Tommy Sheridan, Fergus Ewing, Dr Winnie Ewing, Tricia Marwick, Irene McGugan, Brian Adam, Andrew Wilson, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Colin Campbell, Michael Russell, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Ms Sandra White, Fiona Hyslop, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-1144 Fiona McLeod: Scottish Rugby Union—That the Parliament recognises the extensive consultation carried out by the Scottish Rugby Union; commends them on their new pricing structure for the autumn test season which includes free tickets for under 18’s and students and supports them in their endeavours to bring rugby to the young people of Scotland.

Supported by: Dorothy-Grace Elder, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Richard Lochhead, Shona Robison, Ms Sandra White, Christine Grahame, Tricia Marwick, Andrew Wilson, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Colin Campbell, Michael Russell, Tommy Sheridan, Fergus Ewing, Des McNulty, Nora Radcliffe, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-1143 Mr Kenneth Gibson: Human Rights in Myanmar—That the Parliament expresses its opposition to the continuing restrictions in movement imposed on Myanmar opposition leader, Nobel laureate Aung San Suu Kyi; calls upon the Myanmar military regime to open a dialogue with the National League for Democratic Forces and national minorities and demands full restoration of democracy, human and political rights in Myanmar.

Supported by: Mr John Swinney, Tricia Marwick, Michael Matheson, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Bruce Crawford, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Donald Gorrie, Linda Fabiani, Tommy Sheridan, Alex Neil, Richard Lochhead, Shona Robison, Fiona McLeod, Ms Sandra White, Andrew Wilson, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Fiona Hyslop, Colin Campbell, Michael Russell, Robert Brown, Ms Margo MacDonald, Fergus Ewing, Nora Radcliffe, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-1142 Nora Radcliffe: Planning and Telecommunications Developments—That the Parliament notes the imminent consultation paper by the Scottish Executive on planning and telecommunications developments; welcomes the proposal for full planning control of all new ground-based phone masts; regrets that such planning controls cannot currently be applied retrospectively; notes that in the interim a larger than usual number of notices for erection of such masts are being lodged with local authorities and, if full planning control is accepted, calls upon the Executive to legislate to allow retrospective planning control from the date on which the consultation paper is published.

Supported by: Donald Gorrie, Mr Jamie Stone, Cathie Craigie, Fergus Ewing, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Richard Lochhead, Elaine Smith, Tavish Scott, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Bruce Crawford, Irene McGugan, Christine Grahame, Brian Adam, Andrew Wilson, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Michael Russell, Robert Brown, Tommy Sheridan, Trish Godman, Dr Sylvia Jackson, Ms Margo MacDonald, Ms Sandra White, Fiona McLeod, Pauline McNeill, Cathy Jamieson, Dr Richard Simpson, Euan Robson

S1M-1142.1 Linda Fabiani: Planning and Telecommunications—As an amendment to motion (S1M-1142) in the name of Nora Radcliffe, insert after first "masts" "invites confirmation that the Executive’s proposals will also include full planning controls for major telecommunications development on existing buildings currently deemed to be permitted development;"

Supported by: Nicola Sturgeon, Robin Harper, Roseanna Cunningham, Tommy Sheridan, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Ms Sandra White, Fiona McLeod, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-1141# Richard Lochhead: GM Technology—That the Parliament recognises the level of public concern which exists in relation to GM technology as applied to agriculture and the urgent requirement for informed debate both within and outwith Parliament in order that the full facts surrounding the issue may be made available to the general public and policy-makers alike in an open, transparent and accessible fashion and calls on the Scottish Executive to consult with the appropriate parliamentary committee with a view to establishing an external inquiry into GM technology as applied to agriculture, charged with identifying the relevant threats and opportunities, and investigating the role of the Parliament, the remit of the Executive and other relevant bodies and committees in Scotland in relation to GM technology.

Supported by: Dorothy-Grace Elder, Shona Robison, Fiona McLeod, Ms Sandra White, Robin Harper, Irene McGugan, Christine Grahame, Mr John Munro, Tricia Marwick, Brian Adam, Andrew Wilson, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Michael Russell, Linda Fabiani, Tommy Sheridan, Fergus Ewing, Nora Radcliffe, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-1139# Dorothy-Grace Elder: Bullying of Public Sector Workers—That the Parliament deplores all forms of bullying and intimidation by managers of public sector workers, including NHS staff and local government workers, and unfair practices against workers, including harassment by severe disciplinary actions over petty problems; appeals to workers to inform the Parliament about the public bodies throughout Scotland which attract the most criticism from workers as to the way they are managed; believes that public sector managers should be setting a good example to the nation in staff relations, that bullies should be rooted out and that bullying management, which is not only inhumane but wasteful of time, morale and public money, should not be tolerated; pledges to encourage freedom of speech by workers as an important way of discovering bad practice, and demands that authorities such as Glasgow City Council obey the findings of Industrial Tribunals and reinstate workers who have won their cases.

Supported by: Tommy Sheridan, Robin Harper, Ms Margo MacDonald, Alex Neil

S1M-1138# Dorothy-Grace Elder: Scottish Lottery—That the Parliament supports a separate "Scottish People’s Lottery", with monies going directly to charitable efforts in Scotland and controlled by a board in Scotland; believes that this is the fairest way for the ticket-buying public to see where their money goes locally and to target the causes most in the public interest as well as being one way of ending "fat cat" salaries for people operating the lottery through constant local supervision, and welcomes Richard Branson’s wish to have a Scottish Lottery.

Supported by: Richard Lochhead, Christine Grahame, Fiona McLeod

S1M-1135 Tommy Sheridan: Unison Strike—That the Parliament expresses its concern that Unison members in Scottish local authorities have had to resort to strike action to secure their pay rise and calls upon the Scottish Executive to fund local authorities adequately so that they can settle this justified pay claim.

Supported by: Dorothy-Grace Elder, Richard Lochhead, Robin Harper, Michael Matheson, Christine Grahame, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Michael Russell, Linda Fabiani, Ms Margo MacDonald, Andrew Wilson, Ms Sandra White, Fiona Hyslop, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Fiona McLeod, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-1134 Christine Grahame: Pensioner Poverty in Scotland—That the Parliament notes that one-third of pensioners in Scotland are living in poverty, exactly the same figure as for 1996-97 when the Labour Government came to power, as disclosed in a recent Westminster parliamentary answer to Robert MacLennan MP, Scottish Liberal Democrat for Caithness and Sutherland; further notes that Mr MacLennan believes that Labour has "wasted valuable years in the battle against pensioner poverty", and that "the only answer is to provide pensioners with a decent increase in their depleted state pensions" as stated in a Scottish Liberal Democrats press release of 9 August 2000; further notes that, in answer to question S1W-7384 in the Parliament on 25 August regarding the meeting of the Joint Ministerial Committee on Poverty held on 26 May on pensioner poverty, the outcome of the meeting was only that there should be a programme of work to encourage the take-up of benefits and services by pensioners; agrees with Elderly Fora throughout Scotland that a decent basic state pension is the way out of pensioner poverty, and calls upon the Scottish Liberal Democrat/Labour coalition to make urgent representations at Joint Ministerial level to increase the basic state pension to civilised levels now.

Supported by: Mr Adam Ingram, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Mr Mike Rumbles, Donald Gorrie, Andrew Wilson, Linda Fabiani, Alex Neil, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Richard Lochhead, Shona Robison, Alasdair Morgan, Fiona McLeod, Fergus Ewing, Ms Sandra White, Robin Harper, Michael Matheson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Gil Paterson, Irene McGugan, David Mundell, Tricia Marwick, Brian Adam, Fiona Hyslop, Michael Russell, Ms Margo MacDonald, Nora Radcliffe

S1M-1134.1 Tommy Sheridan: Pensioner Poverty in Scotland—As an amendment to motion (S1M-1134) in the name of Christine Grahame, leave out from "to increase" to end and insert "to restore the earnings link with the state pension with immediate effect".

Supported by: Alex Neil

S1M-1133# Irene McGugan: Maternity Unit in Montrose—That the Parliament notes the possibility that, as a consequence of the Tayside Health Board acute services review, Angus might lose all of its maternity units; notes that there is a specific threat to in-patient ante-natal care, delivery, post-natal in-patient care and 24 hour cover at Montrose; commends the "keep MUM" campaign for its efforts to raise awareness of this issue, and urges the Scottish Executive to reassure residents of Angus and the Mearns that any decisions following the review of maternity services will demonstrate improved outcomes, specifically on patient satisfaction, percentages of births without obstetric intervention, breastfeeding rates and retention of midwifery staff.

Supported by: Alex Johnstone, Mr Mike Rumbles, Mr Andrew Welsh, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Tommy Sheridan, Shona Robison, Richard Lochhead, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Gil Paterson, Tricia Marwick, Brian Adam, Andrew Wilson, Mr Brian Monteith, Mary Scanlon, Mr David Davidson, Nick Johnston, Ben Wallace, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Fiona McLeod

S1M-1131 Tommy Sheridan: Lewis Offshore—That the Parliament believes that the proposed public auction on 14 September 2000 of vital oil fabrication equipment belonging to Lewis Offshore at their Arnish yard in the Western Isles amounts to asset-stripping at the expense of the workers employed at the yard and represents a major blow to the economy of the Western Isles; further believes that the proposed sale of these assets makes a nonsense of grants previously awarded to the industry by Highlands and Islands Enterprise and of the £100,000 provided for the retraining of staff since the closure of the yard; calls upon the Receivers to cancel the auction, and, pending negotiation of a settlement by public funding, calls for Lewis Offshore to be retained as a public asset for such time in the future when the oil fabrication industry picks up again.

Supported by: Shona Robison, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Alex Neil, Michael Matheson, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Gil Paterson, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Ms Sandra White

S1M-1130 Tommy Sheridan: Higher Still 2000 Exams—That the Parliament notes the ongoing problems in providing correct and timely results for the Higher Still 2000 exams; further notes that warnings from teachers earlier this year with regard to the underfunding and under-resourcing of the Higher Still courses were ignored, culminating in the exams difficulties at the expense of thousands of students, and believes that the Minister for Children and Education, Mr Sam Galbraith MSP, should resign.

S1M-1129# Mr Kenneth Gibson: Threat to World's Forests—That the Parliament deplores the industrial logging of the world’s ancient forests; notes that most terrestrial bio-diversity resides in forests and that many species are being driven to extinction by the sheer scale of logging which now results in the destruction of 10 million hectares per year, threatening millions of forest dwelling people by this devastation and the climatic changes caused by the ensuing environmental destabilisation; calls upon the leading industrial nations to co-operate and ensure greater information sharing while developing countermeasures to illegal logging; further calls upon governments to assist the International Tropical Timber Organisation in securing market transparency and by implementing and enforcing laws against illegally logged timber and buying timber from certified forests such as those carrying the mark of the Forest Stewardship Council, and believes that governments should deny "aid" funding to projects that destroy ancient forests while providing funds, logistical support and training to help other nations battling to stop illegal logging and produce timber from sustainable forests and their communities.

Supported by: Fiona Hyslop, Fiona McLeod, Roseanna Cunningham, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Gil Paterson, Tricia Marwick, Linda Fabiani, Shona Robison, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Donald Gorrie, Andrew Wilson, Alex Neil, Richard Lochhead, Alasdair Morgan, Nora Radcliffe, Ms Sandra White, Robin Harper, Michael Matheson, Christine Grahame, Michael Russell, Tommy Sheridan, Dorothy-Grace Elder

S1M-1128 Mr Brian Monteith: Motion of No Confidence—That the Parliament has no confidence in the Minister for Children and Education.

Supported by: David McLetchie, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Alex Fergusson, Alex Johnstone, Bill Aitken, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh, Mr Jamie McGrigor, John Scott, Mr Murray Tosh, Mr David Davidson, Phil Gallie, David Mundell, Miss Annabel Goldie, John Young, Ben Wallace, Mr Keith Harding, Mary Scanlon, Nick Johnston

S1M-1127 Tommy Sheridan: Glasgow Schools PFI—That the Parliament notes with concern the article in the Sunday Herald of 9 July by Torcuil Crichton suggesting that the PFI deal for Glasgow schools is likely to cost taxpayers £34 million more than if the schools were built and refurbished in the public sector and calls for a full investigation by Audit Scotland and the local government ombudsman.

Supported by: Michael Russell, Christine Grahame, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Andrew Wilson, Linda Fabiani, Alex Neil, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Shona Robison, Ms Sandra White, Michael Matheson, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Gil Paterson

S1M-1126# Shona Robison: Population of Dundee—That the Parliament notes with concern the figures revealed by the Registrar General showing that Dundee’s population is set to decline by 20,000 over the next 15 years and therefore calls for an urgent enquiry into the causes of Dundee’s depopulation and for all appropriate action necessary to be taken to reverse this decline.

Supported by: Michael Russell, Christine Grahame, Irene McGugan, Fiona McLeod, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Andrew Wilson, Alex Neil, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Richard Lochhead, Ms Sandra White, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Gil Paterson, Tricia Marwick, Brian Adam, Fiona Hyslop, Mr Duncan Hamilton

S1M-1125# Mr Lloyd Quinan: Autistic Spectrum Disorder Provision—That the Parliament notes that the incidence of autistic spectrum disorder has rapidly increased in the last ten years; further notes the challenge faced by parents, carers and organisations such as Strathclyde Autistic Society regarding the lack of appropriate provision, and urges rapid action to address and rectify the current situation.

Supported by: Michael Russell, Bruce Crawford, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Christine Grahame, Shona Robison, Fergus Ewing, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Michael Matheson, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Fiona McLeod, Donald Gorrie, Andrew Wilson, Linda Fabiani, Alex Neil, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Cathie Craigie, Richard Lochhead, Alasdair Morgan, Ms Sandra White, Robin Harper, Irene McGugan, John Scott, Tricia Marwick, Brian Adam, Fiona Hyslop, Mr Brian Monteith, Dr Winnie Ewing, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Tommy Sheridan, Elaine Smith, Ms Margo MacDonald, Des McNulty, Euan Robson, David Mundell

S1M-1123# David Mundell: Abuse of Older and Disabled People—That the Parliament congratulates Dumfries and District Women’s Aid on securing funding for a project worker to deal exclusively with women over 50 years of age and/or disabled women and notes that this is the first project of its kind in the United Kingdom; expresses its concern at the apparent increase in the abuse of older and disabled people, and believes that the Scottish Executive should support and encourage projects which seek to highlight and tackle this important issue.

Supported by: Bill Aitken, Michael Russell, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Christine Grahame, Donald Gorrie, Andrew Wilson, Linda Fabiani, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Mr Jamie McGrigor, Mr Keith Harding, Alasdair Morgan, Ms Sandra White, Robin Harper, Alex Fergusson, Mr Murray Tosh, Michael Matheson, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Gil Paterson, Fiona Hyslop, Nick Johnston, John Scott, Tommy Sheridan, Mary Scanlon, Mr Brian Monteith, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Mr Lloyd Quinan, David McLetchie, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh, Dr Winnie Ewing, John Young, Phil Gallie, Mrs Margaret Ewing*

S1M-1121# Ms Sandra White: Glasgow North/South Rail Link—That the Parliament notes Her Majesty's Government’s Spending Review 2000 and urges the Scottish Executive to allocate funds from the Scottish share of the review for the development of the Glasgow north/south crossrail scheme or any similar scheme which facilitates the linking of the Glasgow’s north and south rail networks.

Supported by: Dorothy-Grace Elder, Tommy Sheridan, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Michael Russell, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Andrew Wilson, Alex Neil, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Gil Paterson, Tricia Marwick, Robert Brown

S1M-1120 Dr Winnie Ewing: Standby Vessel Replacement—That the Parliament deplores the proposed replacement of standby rescue vessels by helicopters as being a threat to the lives of offshore workers.

Supported by: Dorothy-Grace Elder, Michael Russell, Irene McGugan, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Andrew Wilson, Alex Neil, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Shona Robison, Fiona McLeod, Fergus Ewing, Ms Sandra White, Michael Matheson, Tricia Marwick, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Andrew Welsh, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Tommy Sheridan, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Fiona Hyslop

S1M-1119 Brian Adam: Aberdeen Angus Cattle—That the Parliament calls upon the Scottish Executive to review urgently its decision to exclude the hardy Aberdeen Angus breed of cattle from support payments for less favoured areas and recognises the traditional and distinctive role played by Aberdeen Angus breeders in suckler cow production in Scotland’s hill and island communities.

Supported by: Irene McGugan, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Alex Neil, Richard Lochhead, Alasdair Morgan, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Gil Paterson, Tricia Marwick, Tommy Sheridan, Ben Wallace, Mr Kenneth Gibson

S1M-1118 Pauline McNeill: Childhood Sexual Abuse—That the Parliament recognises the complex, devastating and long term effect of childhood sexual abuse on children and adult survivors; further notes that childhood sexual abuse has an immense impact on society as a whole and calls upon the Scottish Executive to develop and implement a national strategy addressing the social, health and legal implications of sexual abuse and provide central support to develop a network of agencies throughout Scotland to support survivors of sexual abuse.

Supported by: Tommy Sheridan, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Irene Oldfather, Michael Russell, Cathy Jamieson, Donald Gorrie, Andrew Wilson, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Cathie Craigie, Scott Barrie, Elaine Smith, Marilyn Livingstone, Alasdair Morgan, Nora Radcliffe, Robin Harper, Michael Matheson, Bristow Muldoon, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Gil Paterson, Christine Grahame, Rhoda Grant, Malcolm Chisholm, Dr Elaine Murray, Ms Margaret Curran, Trish Godman, Dr Sylvia Jackson, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh, Mary Scanlon, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Dr Richard Simpson, David Mundell, Margaret Jamieson, Cathy Peattie, Maureen Macmillan

S1M-1117# Mr John Munro: Date Stamping on Skye Bridge Concessionary Tickets—That the Parliament supports the Skye against Tolls campaign and Highland Council in their call for the removal of date stamping from Skye Bridge concessionary tickets.

Supported by: Brian Adam, Tommy Sheridan, Shona Robison, Fiona McLeod, Michael Russell, Mr Mike Rumbles, Donald Gorrie, Andrew Wilson, Linda Fabiani, Richard Lochhead, Alasdair Morgan, Nora Radcliffe, Ms Sandra White, Michael Matheson, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Irene McGugan, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Mr Jamie Stone

S1M-1116# Christine Grahame: Age Discrimination in the NHS—That the Parliament notes the recent survey by Pat Grant, consultant at Glasgow Western Infirmary’s accident and emergency department, which identifies trends suggesting age discrimination in accident and emergency practice; further notes last year’s Age Concern report Turning Your Back on Us, which also highlighted examples of age discrimination in the treatment of elderly people by the NHS, and the article by Dr Brian Williams, President of the British Geriatrics Society, in the Scottish Executive’s May 2000 Health Bulletin, which cited evidence of age discrimination within the NHS; further notes the Scottish Executive’s statement that the NHSiS does not discriminate against the elderly, and urges the Executive to initiate an immediate independent assessment of these and other reports and an immediate investigation of the alleged discriminatory practices, both at a national level and in each health board area, and to make these findings available to the Parliament at the earliest opportunity.

Supported by: Mrs Margaret Ewing, Bruce Crawford, Mr Adam Ingram, Brian Adam, Shona Robison, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Ms Sandra White, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Michael Russell, Irene McGugan, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Donald Gorrie, Andrew Wilson, Linda Fabiani, Alex Neil, Richard Lochhead, Alasdair Morgan, Fiona McLeod, Michael Matheson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Gil Paterson, Tricia Marwick, Fiona Hyslop, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Tommy Sheridan, Ms Margo MacDonald, David Mundell, Mary Scanlon

S1M-1115# Dorothy-Grace Elder: Protection of Children from Hard-core Pornography—That the Parliament deplores the decision of the Video Appeal Committee (VAC) of the British Board of Film Classification (BBFC) to uphold an appeal from the distributors of hardcore pornography to allow distribution of videos with a more explicit content than had previously been acceptable, against the wishes of the BBFC board; notes that the BBFC lost a High Court action this year against the VAC over its decision; is appalled at the High Court ruling in London which brushed aside the possible effects on children once this pornographic material enters homes; deplores the rules since issued by the BBFC which permit even more explicit hardcore pornographic videos to be sold in sex shops in Scotland and the UK; calls upon all local authorities to refuse licences for more sex shops which are now anticipated to open due to the ability to sell even more explicit material; notes that the floodgates could now be open for further hardcore pornography to enter the UK; pledges to do all in its power to resist anything which could harm children through viewing pornography, and supports parents in the UK who are appealing for the Obscene Publications Act 1959 to be amended to include new and tougher regulations.

Supported by: Fergus Ewing, Brian Adam, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Alex Neil, Michael Matheson, Christine Grahame, Tricia Marwick, Tommy Sheridan

S1M-1114 David McLetchie: Long Term Care—That the Parliament notes the publication of the NHS National Plan for England; notes that the Scottish Executive will announce its proposals for Scotland in the autumn and that this will include the Scottish Executive’s response to the Report of the Royal Commission on Long Term Care, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to implement in full the recommendation of the Royal Commission that personal care, as defined by the Commission, should be available after assessment, according to need and paid for from general taxation.

Supported by: Mary Scanlon, Ben Wallace, Alex Johnstone, John Scott, David Mundell, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Mr Jamie McGrigor, Mr Keith Harding, Ms Margo MacDonald, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh, Mr David Davidson, Nick Johnston, Mr Brian Monteith, Mr Murray Tosh

S1M-1113 Tommy Sheridan: Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission—That the Parliament believes that the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission must have unimpeded access to all Crown Office papers and relevant evidence in relation to any case which the Commission is investigating; believes that access to requested papers and associated evidence is essential for the Commission to operate as a genuinely independent and credible investigatory body able to uncover miscarriages of justice, and considers that the Crown Office must release all relevant papers requested by the Criminal Cases Review Commission without condition or impediment.

Supported by: Pauline McNeill, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Michael Russell, Donald Gorrie, Andrew Wilson, Alex Neil, Nora Radcliffe, Christine Grahame, Scott Barrie, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Dr Richard Simpson

S1M-1112 Dorothy-Grace Elder: Sex Offenders Register—That the Parliament demands the immediate setting up of a comprehensive register of sex offenders including those who escaped being registered because of being sentenced before the current register was introduced in 1997; notes with alarm that the estimated number of paedophiles, rapists and other sex criminals living in the Scottish community, unregistered and unchecked, is between 6,000 and 13,000; demands immediate extra funding for the police to assist their work on an unofficial register which they are compiling until this can be turned legally into an official register; requests that forms of protection for children be investigated immediately, including electronic tagging of paedophiles and special marks on passports; declares that current protection levels for children are totally inadequate, from lack of provision for Justice Social Workers who check on sex offenders, to lack of aid to ChildLine and extreme shortages of funding for police for the harrowing work they do in this area; acknowledges that it is totally unacceptable that parents live in an era of fear for their children on a daily basis, and declares that it has fewer greater priorities than the protection of children and is willing to back that aim with funding and active work by members.

Supported by: Fergus Ewing, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Alex Neil, Tricia Marwick

S1M-1110 Christine Grahame: Borders Railway Funding—That the Parliament, in respect of the recent statement by John Prescott that £60 billion is earmarked for railway investment over the next ten years, in implementation of the Parliament’s commitment to reinstating the Borders Railway from Edinburgh to Carlisle in terms of motion S1M-922, and given the Executive’s commitment to social inclusion and sustaining rural economies, to moving freight from road to rail and to reducing urban congestion, calls upon the Scottish Executive in its directions and guidance to the Strategic Rail Authority and in bidding for funds to ensure that this rail link has priority.

Supported by: Fergus Ewing, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Colin Campbell, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Robin Harper, Mr Adam Ingram, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Michael Russell, Andrew Wilson, Linda Fabiani, Alex Neil, Ms Sandra White, Michael Matheson, Tricia Marwick, Fiona Hyslop, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Tommy Sheridan, Ms Margo MacDonald, Bruce Crawford

S1M-1109 Irene McGugan: Poverty in Scotland—That the Parliament notes the report from the House of Commons Scottish Affairs Committee, Poverty in Scotland; acknowledges that poverty impacts on the lives of 25% of the population of the country and that the most vulnerable groups in society are most at risk; recognises that many of the recommendations require to be implemented by the Scottish Parliament, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to initiate a full debate in the chamber on the content and findings of the report.

Supported by: Fergus Ewing, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Brian Adam, Shona Robison, Robin Harper, Christine Grahame, Fiona McLeod, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Michael Russell, Donald Gorrie, Andrew Wilson, Linda Fabiani, Alex Neil, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Richard Lochhead, Alasdair Morgan, Michael Matheson, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Gil Paterson, Tricia Marwick, Fiona Hyslop, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Tommy Sheridan, Ms Margo MacDonald

S1M-1108 Lord James Douglas-Hamilton: Upgrading of A1—That the Parliament supports the long-term upgrading of the A1 to dual carriageway status continuously from Edinburgh to the Borders at a time when it is the Department of Environment, Transport and the Regions’ policy to upgrade the A1 from Newcastle to the Borders and in the interests of reducing casualties, improving communication, and increasing the economic competitiveness of south east Scotland and north east England.

Supported by: David McLetchie, Mr Jamie McGrigor, Michael Russell, Andrew Wilson, Alex Neil, Mr Keith Harding, Alasdair Morgan, Brian Adam, Mr Adam Ingram, Mary Scanlon, Nick Johnston, Mr Brian Monteith, Mr Murray Tosh, Mr Lloyd Quinan, David Mundell, Ben Wallace

S1M-1107# Trish Godman: Community Gardens—That the Parliament recognises the value of community gardening in improving health, building communities, increasing bio-diversity and promoting regeneration, while providing refreshment and healthy recreation for those without a garden; notes that such gardens face fierce competition for space in urban areas, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to help to secure the future of community gardens through revised planning guidance and by promoting them through the New Opportunities Fund.

Supported by: Tommy Sheridan, Shona Robison, Pauline McNeill, Robin Harper, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Irene Oldfather, Donald Gorrie, Andrew Wilson, Elaine Smith, Michael Matheson, Robert Brown, Margaret Jamieson, Cathy Peattie, Maureen Macmillan, Mr Jamie Stone

S1M-1106 Ian Jenkins: Sydney 2000 and European Cup Athletics—That the Parliament congratulates all the Scottish athletes who contributed to remarkable British successes at the European cup at Gateshead; welcomes the progress made by the Scottish Executive in developing community sports facilities, and wishes the Great Britain team well in the forthcoming Sydney Olympic Games.

Supported by: Donald Gorrie, Mrs Mary Mulligan, Mr Brian Monteith

S1M-1105 Fergus Ewing: Vehicle Body Repair Specialists and VAT—That the Parliament calls upon the Scottish Executive to make representations to Her Majesty’s Government to end the discrimination suffered by those vehicle body repair specialists which are not owned by insurance companies and which therefore do not enjoy exemption from VAT on labour; notes that this places the independent repair shops at a severe competitive disadvantage, and further calls upon the Executive to investigate whether this constitutes an infringement of EU law and competition policy or is open to challenge at the instance of the Competition Commission or otherwise.

Supported by: Dorothy-Grace Elder, Shona Robison, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Michael Russell, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Andrew Wilson, Alex Neil, Alasdair Morgan, Michael Matheson, Tricia Marwick, Brian Adam, Fiona Hyslop, Tommy Sheridan, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Irene McGugan

S1M-1104 Alex Neil: Failings of New Deal—That the Parliament notes the findings by the National Institute for Economic and Social Research that 80% of the jobs filled by the New Deal would have been there if the New Deal did not exist; notes with concern that only one fifth of the Scottish New Deal budget has been spent so far; seeks an assurance that what is left of the money will be applied effectively, and calls for responsibility for the New Deal and the remainder of its budget in Scotland to be transferred to the Scottish Parliament.

Supported by: Ms Margo MacDonald, Brian Adam, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Irene McGugan, Tommy Sheridan, Shona Robison, Christine Grahame, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Michael Russell, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Mike Rumbles, Donald Gorrie, Andrew Wilson, Ms Sandra White, Michael Matheson, Tricia Marwick, Fiona Hyslop

S1M-1103# Irene McGugan: Skye Bridge Toll Regime—That the Parliament notes the opinion of Professor Robert Black QC that the Assignation Statement in respect of the Skye Bridge is not signed and not dated, and that it therefore may not be a lawful document; notes that a lack of valid authority could mean that tolls have been demanded illegally and people wrongly prosecuted and convicted for not paying their tolls, and believes that the Scottish Executive should undertake an urgent review of the legal status of the Skye Bridge toll regime in the interests of justice.

Supported by: Mr John Munro, Fergus Ewing, Brian Adam, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Tommy Sheridan, Shona Robison, Christine Grahame, Fiona McLeod, Michael Russell, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Mike Rumbles, Donald Gorrie, Andrew Wilson, Linda Fabiani, Alex Neil, Richard Lochhead, Alasdair Morgan, Michael Matheson, Tricia Marwick, Fiona Hyslop, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Ms Margo MacDonald, Mr Kenneth Gibson

S1M-1102# Mr Andrew Welsh: Montrose Bridge—That the Parliament notes that the A95 bridge over the South Esk at Montrose is nearing the end of its life span; supports Angus Council in its efforts to replace this vital lifeline, and believes that the Scottish Executive should provide funding or extra capital borrowing consent for this project.

Supported by: Brian Adam, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Irene McGugan, Shona Robison, Robin Harper, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Andrew Wilson, Richard Lochhead, Ms Sandra White, Michael Matheson, Tricia Marwick, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Bruce Crawford, Mr David Davidson

S1M-1101# Mr Brian Monteith: Richard Demarco and the Road to Meikle Seggie—That the Parliament congratulates Richard Demarco on the opening of his exhibition The Road to Meikle Seggie, celebrating the achievements of his career as an artist, impresario, teacher and philosopher, as an inspiration to many other artists and art lovers, as a champion of human rights through the transformational power of art in society and as an ambassador for Edinburgh and Scotland, and urges the Scottish Executive to initiate discussions between the Scottish Arts Council and the City of Edinburgh Council to ensure that suitable premises are found in Edinburgh for the storage, study and display of his extensive archives.

Supported by: Michael Russell, Ian Jenkins, Linda Fabiani, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Robin Harper, Donald Gorrie, Mr Keith Harding, John Young, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Mr David Davidson, Bill Aitken, Alex Johnstone, Mr Murray Tosh, Alex Fergusson

S1M-1100 Elaine Thomson: World Corporate Games, July 2000—That the Parliament notes Aberdeen’s success in attracting the 13th annual World Corporate Games, in terms of health by encouraging the "Fit for Work, Fit for Life" ethos amongst employees and by promoting the profile and economy of the North East; further notes that the 10,000 competitors are expected to contribute approximately £6 million to the local economy, and hopes that the competitors, who originate from up to 40 different countries around the world, return to visit this beautiful city and area.

Supported by: Shona Robison

S1M-1099# Rhoda Grant: Oil Rig Fabrication Industry—That the Parliament, in view of the present rundown in the oil fabrication industry, calls upon the oil companies to establish clearly the likely future workload for the rig fabrication yards in the UK, and Scotland in particular, with a view to establishing a sustainable base for oil fabrication and identifying where diversification away from fabrication will be required, and further calls upon the oil companies to establish a contingency fund, the Oil Rig Fabrication Communities Contingency Fund, to help those leaving the industry or those no longer employed in the industry to gain new skills, to provide support for the communities who are hit hardest by the rundown and to help those yards with spare capacity to diversify into other areas of engineering.

Supported by: Maureen Macmillan, Mr Duncan McNeil, Elaine Thomson, Dr Sylvia Jackson, Des McNulty, Dr Richard Simpson, Cathie Craigie, Lewis Macdonald, Nora Radcliffe, Fergus Ewing, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Mr John Munro, Mr Jamie Stone, Tricia Marwick, Alex Neil, Brian Adam, Shona Robison, Robin Harper, Donald Gorrie, Richard Lochhead, Elaine Smith, Fiona Hyslop, Dr Elaine Murray, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Tommy Sheridan, Trish Godman, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mr Kenneth Gibson

S1M-1098 Ms Sandra White: Asylum Seekers—That the Parliament notes the concerns raised at the meeting "Asylum Seekers Speak Out For Themselves" held in the Parliament on the experiences of asylum seekers and refugees, highlighting the poor living conditions and the lack of decent living facilities, interpreters and staff dedicated to work with and aid refugees, and calls upon the Scottish Executive and Her Majesty's Government to take urgent action to alleviate the poor conditions experienced by many refugees and to make contact with the agencies working with asylum seekers and refugees, to determine what action can be taken to alleviate their plight.

Supported by: Shona Robison, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Fiona McLeod, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Richard Lochhead, Irene McGugan, Bruce Crawford, Alex Neil, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Dr Winnie Ewing, Mr Gil Paterson, Fergus Ewing, Fiona Hyslop, Michael Matheson, Mr John Swinney, Christine Grahame, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mr John Munro, Donald Gorrie, Nora Radcliffe, Mr Jamie McGrigor, Linda Fabiani, Tommy Sheridan, Alasdair Morgan, Colin Campbell, Kay Ullrich, Andrew Wilson, Malcolm Chisholm, Brian Adam, Robin Harper, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Trish Godman, Margaret Smith, Ms Margo MacDonald, Pauline McNeill

S1M-1095 Mr Gil Paterson: Scottish Granite for the Scottish Parliament—That the Parliament regrets the passing of Senor Enric Miralles and as a matter of respect believes that his wish that Scottish granite be used for the Scottish Parliament project should be adhered to and that his description of the "sparkle" from Scottish granite should be evident in this project as a testament to his memory.

Supported by: Fergus Ewing, Alex Neil, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Robin Harper, Christine Grahame, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Alasdair Morgan, Michael Matheson, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Tricia Marwick

S1M-1094 Tommy Sheridan: Consultation Document on School Closures in Cumbernauld—That the Parliament notes the disclosures by North Lanarkshire Council officials at the weekend that the consultation document for the review of primary school provision in Cumbernauld contained inaccuracies and that once identified those inaccuracies were not disclosed to the council prior to the vote on this issue; further notes that the council was misled by the consultation documents placed before it prior to the vote on the school closures and that the consultation process has been flawed, and requests that North Lanarkshire Council suspend school closures until any legal implications have been addressed.

Supported by: Dennis Canavan, Alex Neil, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Donald Gorrie, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Gil Paterson

S1M-1093 Paul Martin: High crime levels in parts of Glasgow—That the Parliament notes with concern the high crime levels in areas such as Blackhill, Sighthill, Royston and other parts of Glasgow and calls for a comprehensive review of policing with a remit that will include community policing, the effectiveness of telecommunications systems that communicate with members of the public, resources made available to crime prevention panels and protocols in place with local authorities following court convictions.

Supported by: Dorothy-Grace Elder, Pauline McNeill

S1M-1088 Andrew Wilson: School Closures in Cumbernauld—That the Parliament notes that the documentary evidence placed before North Lanarkshire Council concerning Cumbernauld schools’ closures contained inaccuracies; further notes with concern that once these inaccuracies were identified, no attempt was made to advise the Council of them; believes, on the basis of these inaccuracies, that the schools’ closures process is flawed, and calls upon North Lanarkshire Council to suspend all further school closures until a thorough investigation has taken place.

Supported by: Alex Neil, Dennis Canavan, Nicola Sturgeon, Linda Fabiani, Brian Adam, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Fiona McLeod, Ms Sandra White, Michael Matheson, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Gil Paterson, Tricia Marwick, Fiona Hyslop, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Tommy Sheridan, Mr Lloyd Quinan

S1M-1082 Dorothy-Grace Elder: Appreciation to Staff of the Parliament—That the Parliament, at the end of its first year, records its warm thanks to the staff, including all clerks, security staff, staff of the Chamber Office, Official Report Office, Broadcasting Unit, Parliamentary Police Force, postal service, catering staff, cleaners and all others who have given wholeheartedly of their best, and considers that the staff have done Scotland proud and, being the first staff of the first Scottish Parliament in 300 years, have proved to be exceptional ambassadors and, unlike elected members, have attracted only praise from the public and that their conduct has set a very high standard for MSPs to attempt to emulate.

Supported by: Fergus Ewing, Richard Lochhead, Michael Matheson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Tommy Sheridan, Ms Margo MacDonald, Mr Brian Monteith, Mr Lloyd Quinan

S1M-1081 Dorothy-Grace Elder: Growing Concern and John Wheatley College—That the Parliament congratulates Peter McMahon of Growing Concern, Daldowie and the John Wheatley College, Easterhouse on Mr McMahon gaining the European Special Award for outstanding achievement by a student and records its high regard for the achievements of students, lecturers and social workers at Growing Concern and the John Wheatley College who have excelled at working through learning difficulties and given Scotland reason to be proud of their success.

Supported by: Tommy Sheridan

S1M-1080 Mr Gil Paterson: School Repairs Fund—That the Parliament notes the considerable outstanding repair bill faced by Scottish schools; notes that in some cases schools have been allowed to fall into an unacceptable state of disrepair, simply because local authorities cannot afford the necessary investment for improvement; draws attention to Airdrie Academy as an example of a school whose major repair requirements have provoked a crisis; further notes the considerable underspend for financial year 1999-2000 by the Scottish Executive, and calls for some of this money to be allocated to a schools repair contingency fund to ensure that local authorities can afford to educate our children in decent and safe surroundings.

Supported by: Nicola Sturgeon, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Alex Neil, Fergus Ewing, Andrew Wilson, Linda Fabiani, Brian Adam, Shona Robison, Fiona McLeod, Donald Gorrie, Michael Matheson, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Irene McGugan, Tommy Sheridan, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Dr Winnie Ewing

S1M-1078 Linda Fabiani: Scottish Civic Forum 1 July 2000—That the Parliament notes the success of the Scottish Civic Forum event on Saturday 1 July 2000 in the Chamber and congratulates Scottish Civic Forum; considers the event to have been a fitting celebration of the first anniversary of the Parliament and requests that the Corporate Body investigates the possibility of such events being held more often in the Chamber, perhaps four times a year, to allow parliamentarians more opportunities to hear the views of the people of Scotland.

Supported by: Andrew Wilson, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Alex Neil, Fergus Ewing, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh, Ms Sandra White, Dr Winnie Ewing, Michael Russell, Irene McGugan, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Shona Robison, Ian Jenkins, Donald Gorrie, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Richard Lochhead, Michael Matheson, Tricia Marwick, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Tommy Sheridan, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Lloyd Quinan

S1M-1076 Ian Jenkins: European Year of Languages—That the Parliament welcomes the designation of 2001 as "European Year of Languages"; further welcomes the year’s aim of celebrating Europe’s linguistic heritage and promoting language learning; notes that individual member states decide which languages should be included; recognises the high prestige in which the Gaelic and Scots languages are held internationally, and calls upon Her Majesty's Government to have Scots and Gaelic designated as eligible for this important project.

Supported by: Nora Radcliffe, Donald Gorrie, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Christine Grahame, Margaret Jamieson, Fergus Ewing, Linda Fabiani, Alex Neil, Shona Robison, Fiona McLeod, Ms Sandra White

S1M-1075 Mike Watson: The Jeely Piece Club Silver Jubilee—That the Parliament associates itself with the community-based project, the Jeely Piece Club in Castlemilk, Glasgow, in celebrating its Silver Jubilee; congratulates all those parents and children who have contributed to the continuing success of this project, and encourages the promotion of such projects, which are based on local support and an inclusive, collaborative way of working.

Supported by: Dr Sylvia Jackson, Donald Gorrie, Irene Oldfather, Cathie Craigie, Karen Whitefield, Mrs Mary Mulligan, Margaret Jamieson, Scott Barrie, Marilyn Livingstone, Robert Brown, Mr Gil Paterson, Maureen Macmillan, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Tommy Sheridan, Cathy Peattie

S1M-1074 Mr Brian Monteith: Stirling's Hogmanay Celebration—That the Parliament expresses its concern over moves by Stirling Council to spend £30,000 of local taxpayers money burning a "fire sculpture" to celebrate the coming New Year; notes that this decision comes at a time when frontline services such as local schools are witnessing cuts in their budgets for staff development and teaching materials, and only months after the council cut services and increased the council tax by 10%, and condemns this use of public money which should be spent on addressing the real priorities of local residents.

Supported by: Bill Aitken, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton

S1M-1071 Mr Keith Harding: Holding Local Authority Elections in 2002—That the Parliament calls upon the Scottish Executive to ensure that the next local authority elections proceed as planned in 2002, separate from the Scottish Parliament elections in 2003 and in line with the recommendations of the McIntosh Commission and the Kerley Committee; believes that this would help to ensure that local issues are properly aired and debated and would clarify the alternatives open to electors for a level of government that is responsible for a wide range of services and for spending hundreds of millions of pounds of public money, and further believes that such debate would be almost impossible to achieve if a combined Holyrood and council poll was held.

Supported by: David McLetchie, Alex Johnstone, John Scott, Mr Brian Monteith, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh, Phil Gallie, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Nick Johnston, Tommy Sheridan, Mary Scanlon, Mr David Davidson, Mr Kenneth Gibson

S1M-1070 Mrs Mary Mulligan: Bright Sparks—That the Parliament offers its congratulations to the Bathgate Academy young enterprise company "Brightsparks" on its success in the Scottish National Young Enterprise Scheme and wishes this team further success as the Scottish representatives in the UK finals of the competition.

Supported by: Donald Gorrie, Karen Whitefield, Mike Watson, Scott Barrie, Marilyn Livingstone, Robin Harper, Fiona Hyslop

S1M-1069 Fergus Ewing: Criminal Injuries Compensation—That the Parliament believes that it is manifestly unjust that victims of sexual abuse are denied compensation under the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board scheme purely because that abuse occurred before 1979 and the abuse was committed by a member of the victim’s family; believes that this distinction is arbitrary and that those victims of such sexual abuse, including Susan Stuart and Jake Strachan, should receive fair compensation, and urges the Scottish Executive to make representations to Her Majesty’s Government for the award of such compensation to be made on an ex-gratia basis.

Supported by: Nick Johnston, Phil Gallie, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh, Donald Gorrie, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Brian Adam, Shona Robison, Christine Grahame, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Fiona McLeod, Michael Russell, Alex Neil, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Dr Winnie Ewing, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Adam Ingram, Andrew Wilson, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Ms Sandra White, Michael Matheson, Tricia Marwick, Tommy Sheridan, Ms Margo MacDonald, Mary Scanlon, David Mundell, Mr Kenneth Gibson

S1M-1068 Fergus Ewing: Scottish Consumer Representation for Gas and Electricity Markets—That the Parliament notes the exodus of decision-making power with regard to consumer representation for gas and electricity markets from Scotland to the south of England as a result of the Utilities Bill; further notes that whilst one Scottish office will remain open, staff and responsibilities will inevitably be reduced; expresses its concern that the quality of representation may suffer; further expresses its concern that this change will also deprive Scotland of existing jobs, and requests that the Scottish Executive reconsider its position and make representations to Her Majesty’s Government opposing the proposal in the Utilities Bill that the existing area electricity consumer committee be abolished and replaced with a single Gas and Electricity Consumer Council for the whole of the UK.

Supported by: Dorothy-Grace Elder, Brian Adam, Shona Robison, Christine Grahame, Fiona McLeod, Michael Russell, Alex Neil, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Adam Ingram, Andrew Wilson, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Richard Lochhead, Ms Sandra White, Michael Matheson, Ms Margo MacDonald

S1M-1067 Mr Kenny MacAskill: Essential User Fuel Duty Rebate—That the Parliament notes that, as a consequence of high taxation, the cost of providing fuel for road haulage companies in Scotland is double that of our European neighbours; notes that, as a consequence, the number of road miles travelled by lorry has not been reduced, merely that Scottish drivers and operators are being undercut and displaced by continental drivers and operators, and that across Scotland the cost of goods is rising to reflect increasing transport costs; further notes the answer to question S1W-7586 by Sarah Boyack on 26 June 2000, indicating that the Scottish Executive would carefully consider any proposals by the Road Haulage Association for an essential user rebate; therefore draws the attention of the Scottish Executive to the proposals published by the Road Haulage Association for an essential user rebate for fuel duty, a scheme which would ensure that on valid business journeys the cost of fuel to Scottish operators was brought into line with the cost of fuel to our nearest continental neighbours by rebating the excess taxation charged here, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to publish a detailed consideration of the impacts and benefits of such a scheme.

Supported by: Dorothy-Grace Elder, Shona Robison, Brian Adam, Christine Grahame, Nicola Sturgeon, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Fiona McLeod, Michael Russell, Irene McGugan, Linda Fabiani, Alex Neil, Ms Sandra White, Mr John Swinney, Fergus Ewing, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Adam Ingram, Andrew Wilson, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Richard Lochhead, Alasdair Morgan, Michael Matheson, Tricia Marwick, Fiona Hyslop, Bruce Crawford

S1M-1066# Helen Eadie: Technology and Customer Services—That the Parliament welcomes the use of new technology in the public and private sectors; notes however that advances in technology, such as the use of voicemail or pre-recorded messages to direct a customer through a telephone system, should not be used as a substitute for direct customer service, and believes that the businesses and residents of Dunfermline East should be given the option of talking directly to a person to have their concerns addressed promptly.

S1M-1064 Trish Godman: Ferguson Shipbuilders and Western Ferries—That the Parliament warmly congratulates the management and workforce of Ferguson Shipbuilders Ltd., Port Glasgow, for securing a contract to build a passenger ferry vessel for Western Ferries; is of the view that this important order demonstrates, in the clearest possible way, that the Port Glasgow yard deservedly enjoys a first class reputation as a builder of specialist vessels, and believes that this contract will be followed by others which will enable the yard to sustain its important role in both the Inverclyde economy and the United Kingdom shipbuilding industry.

Supported by: Donald Gorrie, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Karen Whitefield, Mike Watson, Tommy Sheridan

S1M-1063 Andrew Wilson: Voting Rights for 16 Year Olds—That the Parliament recognises that young people are entitled to be treated in a fair, just and consistent manner and are entitled to have the same rights as other citizens; calls upon the Scottish Executive to implement immediately recommendation 167 of the McIntosh Commission, which asks for particular consideration to be given to the possibility of extending the vote in community council elections to 16 year olds, as a first step in extending the franchise in all elections to 16 year olds, and further calls upon the Scottish Executive to make representations to Her Majesty's Government to promote and support appropriate amending legislation at the first available opportunity so that in all future elections young people from the age of 16 will be able to vote.

Supported by: Mr Kenneth Gibson, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Shona Robison, Donald Gorrie, Brian Adam, Nicola Sturgeon, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Fiona McLeod, Michael Russell, Linda Fabiani, Alex Neil, Dr Winnie Ewing, Ms Sandra White, Nora Radcliffe, Mr John Swinney, Mr Adam Ingram, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Robin Harper, Richard Lochhead, Alasdair Morgan, Michael Matheson, Tricia Marwick, Tommy Sheridan

S1M-1059 Mr John McAllion: Educational and Training Provision for Scots on the Autistic Spectrum Disorder—That the Parliament notes the emerging problems surrounding the funding of educational and training provision for young Scots on the autistic spectrum disorder, accepts that local authorities such as City of Dundee Council and other agencies find it increasingly difficult to meet the increased demand for this provision from existing resources, and calls for a national debate within and outside the Parliament on how these problems can be identified and overcome.

Supported by: Mr Lloyd Quinan, Fergus Ewing, Shona Robison, Donald Gorrie, Brian Adam, Cathie Craigie, Christine Grahame, Fiona McLeod, Alex Neil, Ms Sandra White, Elaine Smith, Mike Watson, Nora Radcliffe, Mr John Swinney, Robert Brown, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Adam Ingram, Robin Harper, Cathy Jamieson, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Alasdair Morgan, Michael Matheson, Rhoda Grant, Tommy Sheridan, Mary Scanlon

S1M-1058 Margaret Jamieson: Securing of Additional Benefits by East Ayrshire Council—That the Parliament congratulates East Ayrshire Council on obtaining £2.6 million of additional benefits for its citizens during 1999-2000 and on its total of £9.8 million of additional benefits achieved since its inception in 1996 and supports East Ayrshire Council and other councils in Scotland in their efforts to ensure social inclusion through the maximisation of take-up of benefits.

Supported by: Cathy Jamieson, Malcolm Chisholm, Scott Barrie, Tommy Sheridan, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh

S1M-1053 Brian Adam: Sheltered Housing Wardens Night-Time Cover—That the Parliament notes the impact that local authority reviews of the European Working Time Directive have had on the provision of night-time warden services in sheltered housing complexes and calls upon the Scottish Executive to consider the problem urgently.

Supported by: Alex Neil, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Shona Robison, Christine Grahame, Nicola Sturgeon, Fiona McLeod, Michael Russell, Irene McGugan, Andrew Wilson, Dr Winnie Ewing, Ms Sandra White, Nora Radcliffe, Fergus Ewing, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Adam Ingram, Robin Harper, Donald Gorrie, Richard Lochhead, Roseanna Cunningham, Michael Matheson, Tricia Marwick, Fiona Hyslop, Tommy Sheridan

S1M-1052 Brian Adam: Access to WIPLL and other New Technologies—That the Parliament expresses concern that the new fast-speed telecom system Wireless IP Local Loop, is not being rolled out in Scotland currently; notes that this will disadvantage the development of e-commerce in Scotland, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to make the appropriate representations to allow equality of access to new technologies through all available avenues, including regulation. R

Supported by: Alex Neil, Shona Robison, Christine Grahame, Fiona McLeod, Michael Russell, Andrew Wilson, Nora Radcliffe, Fergus Ewing, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Tricia Marwick

S1M-1050 Mr Jamie Stone: Access to Free Music Tuition—That the Parliament welcomes Gizzen Griggs, Tain Royal Academy’s youth band, notes with concern the decreasing number of local authorities who still offer free music lessons and believes that music tuition should be delivered free at source to all students across Scotland.

Supported by: Fergus Ewing, Nora Radcliffe, Pauline McNeill, Robert Brown, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Linda Fabiani, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Donald Gorrie, Brian Adam, Fiona McLeod, Irene McGugan, Dr Winnie Ewing, Ms Sandra White, Euan Robson, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Adam Ingram, Robin Harper, Richard Lochhead, Michael Matheson, Tommy Sheridan, Ms Margo MacDonald, Cathy Peattie, Mr Kenneth Gibson

S1M-1049# Ms Sandra White: Glasgow Airport Direct Rail Link—That the Parliament notes the statement in the Association of European Airlines’ report on air/rail connections in Europe that rail links should exist at airports handling three million passengers per annum; further notes that Glasgow Airport, according to the most recent figures, handles well in excess of four million passengers per annum, and urges the Scottish Executive to initiate plans to establish a direct rail link to Glasgow Airport.

Supported by: Mr Kenny MacAskill, Colin Campbell, Mr Andrew Welsh, Christine Grahame, Fergus Ewing, Brian Adam, Shona Robison, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Nora Radcliffe, Fiona McLeod, Alex Neil, Andrew Wilson, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Michael Matheson, Robert Brown, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Linda Fabiani, Mr Adam Ingram, Nicola Sturgeon, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Michael Russell, Dr Winnie Ewing, Mr Gil Paterson, Robin Harper, Donald Gorrie, Tommy Sheridan

S1M-1048 Ms Margo MacDonald: Library of Alexandria—That the Parliament congratulates the Government and the people of Egypt on the completion of the new Library of Alexandria and noting the rich history of Scotland’s own literature, asks that an appropriate collection of works is gifted to the people of Egypt in recognition of their achievement.

Supported by: Alex Neil, Fiona McLeod, Mr John Swinney, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Ms Sandra White, Linda Fabiani, Andrew Wilson, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Robin Harper, Christine Grahame, Brian Adam, Nora Radcliffe, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Irene McGugan, Fiona Hyslop, Michael Matheson, Mr Adam Ingram, Donald Gorrie, Shona Robison, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Michael Russell, Dennis Canavan, Fergus Ewing, Mr Gil Paterson, Tricia Marwick, Mr Brian Monteith, David Mundell, Mr Keith Harding, Nick Johnston, Mr Jamie McGrigor

S1M-1046 Mr Kenny MacAskill: Use of Differential Inflation Rates in Calculating Benefits and Taxes—That the Parliament notes that in calculations for money taken through petrol duty, Her Majesty's Treasury intends to use an inflation rate of 3.3%, while for calculations for money paid out through the state pension, an inflation rate of only 1.1% will be used; believes that is unfair to use two different inflation figures, selecting the lower to work out what increase there should be in money paid out to pensioners, yet using the higher to decide what tax increase motorists should pay, and condemns this type of accounting practice as a misleading and deceitful excuse for attacking both pensioners and motorists.

Supported by: Shona Robison, Christine Grahame, Fergus Ewing, Brian Adam, Mr John Swinney, Fiona McLeod, Alex Neil, Andrew Wilson, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Irene McGugan, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Linda Fabiani, Donald Gorrie, Nicola Sturgeon, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Michael Russell, Ms Sandra White, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Fiona Hyslop, Tommy Sheridan

S1M-1045 John Scott: Nuclear Power in Germany—That the Parliament registers its grave concern over the stated intent of the German government to close down nuclear power stations, believing that such action will have an extremely detrimental effect on Germany’s compliance with the Rio Agreement and will increase global warming.

Supported by: Mr Jamie McGrigor, Mr David Davidson, Nick Johnston

S1M-1045.1 Dorothy-Grace Elder: Nuclear Power in Germany—As an amendment to motion (S1M-1045) in the name of John Scott, leave out from "registers" to end and insert "applauds the German Government on their decision to close their nuclear power stations; notes that this move is in line with the Rio Declaration’s aims of sustainable development and application of the precautionary principle and the international Bruntland Commission’s conclusions that nuclear power caused a decline in quality of life and that the only solution was the adoption of sustainable development and to start living from "nature’s income"; further notes that it was in the 1997 Kyoto Protocol that developed countries agreed to reduce emissions of six greenhouse gases by 5.2% in total, and concludes that a truly sustainable energy policy, as being adopted in Germany, should be the long-term solution to pollution and global warming."

Supported by: Mr Kenny MacAskill, Alex Neil, Kay Ullrich, Bruce Crawford, Nicola Sturgeon, Shona Robison, Michael Matheson, Andrew Wilson, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Mr John McAllion, Dennis Canavan, Ms Margo MacDonald, Colin Campbell, Tricia Marwick, Michael Russell, Fergus Ewing, Christine Grahame, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mr Adam Ingram, Cathy Jamieson, Tommy Sheridan, Robin Harper, Donald Gorrie, Mr John Munro, Dr Sylvia Jackson, Brian Adam, Dr Winnie Ewing, Mr Gil Paterson, Ms Sandra White

S1M-1044 Linda Fabiani: Scottish Criminal Records Office Checks on Voluntary Organisations—That the Parliament notes the previously stated intention of the Scottish Executive to make Scottish Criminal Records Office checks mandatory for those working with children in Scotland and that there is now to be a delay in implementation; welcomes the introduction of the checks, but notes that the charges for these checks will place a weighty burden upon voluntary organisations; calls upon the Scottish Executive to take the opportunity afforded by the delay in the implementation of the scheme to examine possible avenues for exempting voluntary organisations from those charges, and asks that the current working party also considers this.

Supported by: Nicola Sturgeon, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Gil Paterson, Alex Neil, Ms Sandra White, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Christine Grahame, Brian Adam, Colin Campbell, Mr John Swinney, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Nora Radcliffe, Fiona McLeod, Andrew Wilson, Irene McGugan, Robert Brown, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Donald Gorrie, Shona Robison, Michael Russell, Fergus Ewing, Dennis Canavan, Robin Harper, Tricia Marwick, Tommy Sheridan, Mr David Davidson, David Mundell

S1M-1043 Dorothy-Grace Elder: Steeplejacks—That the Parliament pays tribute to the skills of the nation’s steeplejacks who maintain our monuments, churches and major buildings and undertake work which makes them "heroes on high" and, in particular, pays tribute to Mr Mick Hatton, who lost his life while working at Edinburgh Castle and sends its tribute and respects to Mr Hatton’s family at their time of sorrow.

Supported by: Andrew Wilson, Fergus Ewing, Tricia Marwick, Tommy Sheridan

S1M-1042 Cathy Jamieson: Breast Feeding and Returning to Work—That the Parliament congratulates the Scottish Executive on its adoption of the Scottish Breastfeeding Group (SBG) code of practice on breastfeeding and returning to work and urges all employers in Scotland to adopt the code and the SBG recommendations on its implementation.

Supported by: Marilyn Livingstone, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Christine Grahame, Nora Radcliffe, Pauline McNeill, Alex Neil, Maureen Macmillan, Mrs Mary Mulligan, Scott Barrie, Irene Oldfather, Cathie Craigie, Malcolm Chisholm, Karen Whitefield, Elaine Smith, Margaret Jamieson, Mr Gil Paterson, Trish Godman, Rhoda Grant, Fiona Hyslop, Dr Elaine Murray, Tommy Sheridan, Dr Richard Simpson, Cathy Peattie

S1M-1041 Cathy Jamieson: Forgotten Children Campaign—That the Parliament supports the "Forgotten Children Campaign" launched by Save the Children to draw attention to the suffering of the 20 million children who have been forced from their homes by war and urges all MSPs to donate photographs as a contribution to the campaign’s "Portrait Pledge Photographs" initiative.

Supported by: Marilyn Livingstone, Dr Sylvia Jackson, Nora Radcliffe, Fiona McLeod, Alex Neil, Maureen Macmillan, Mrs Mary Mulligan, Scott Barrie, Donald Gorrie, Irene McGugan, Ms Sandra White, Elaine Smith, Mike Watson, Margaret Jamieson, Trish Godman, Rhoda Grant, Tommy Sheridan, Dr Richard Simpson, Cathy Peattie, Mr Kenneth Gibson

S1M-1040# Cathy Jamieson: Food Safety—That the Parliament congratulates the Co-operative Wholesale Society (CWS) in surveying the views of consumers regarding food quality and food safety; notes that this survey revealed consumer concerns regarding intensive farming methods, pesticide contamination, food advertising directed at children, the use of sewage as a fertiliser, the use of animal by-products in animal feed, the excessive use of artificial colourings and flavourings and the exploitation of Third World farmers by multi-national food companies; further notes that the CWS is now conducting further inquiries to identify how consumers concerns on food safety can be addressed, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to work with the CWS in identifying initiatives to address the concerns of Scottish consumers in relation to food safety. R

Supported by: Marilyn Livingstone, Dr Sylvia Jackson, Pauline McNeill, Maureen Macmillan, Mrs Mary Mulligan, Scott Barrie, Donald Gorrie, Shona Robison, Malcolm Chisholm, Karen Whitefield, Elaine Smith, Mike Watson, Margaret Jamieson, Trish Godman, Robin Harper, Rhoda Grant, Dr Elaine Murray, Tommy Sheridan, Dr Richard Simpson, Cathy Peattie

S1M-1039 Brian Adam: Moratorium on GM Crop Farm Scale Trials—That the Parliament notes with concern the importation of GM contaminated seed; regrets the Scottish Executive’s decision to proceed with the GM crop trial despite substantial concerns; has no confidence in the farm scale trial currently underway at Daviot, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to abandon the trial and introduce immediately a moratorium on further farm scale trials.

Supported by: Ms Sandra White, Fergus Ewing, Colin Campbell, Mr John Swinney, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Alex Neil, Irene McGugan, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Linda Fabiani, Shona Robison, Michael Russell, Andrew Wilson, Mr Gil Paterson, Richard Lochhead, Alasdair Morgan, Tricia Marwick, Mr John Munro, Tommy Sheridan

S1M-1038 Trish Godman: Threatened Closure of Royal Ordnance Bishopton—That the Parliament warmly commends the shop stewards at the Royal Ordinance Factory Bishopton and their trade unions for their wholly admirable and substantial campaign to maintain the manufacture of military propellants and related products at the plant; firmly believes that, even at this late date, BAE Systems should have the courage to rescind its earlier and unwise decision to close the plant, and further believes that such a change of heart would make good sense because it would allow for the retention of the last propellant manufacturing facility in the United Kingdom.

Supported by: Hugh Henry, Mr Duncan McNeil, Brian Adam R, Nora Radcliffe, Maureen Macmillan, Donald Gorrie, Michael Russell, Rhoda Grant

S1M-1037# Colin Campbell: Support for Ferguson Shipbuilders Ltd. Port Glasgow—That the Parliament notes that the Ferguson Shipbuilders Ltd. Port Glasgow shipyard is currently bidding for an order to build a ferry for Northlink; recognises that this order will guarantee continued work for the 400 strong workforce for up to two years; recognises the yard’s position as a major employer in the Inverclyde area; further recognises the detrimental effect which the closure of the yard would have on local businesses and the local economy; congratulates the yard on its reputation as a high quality shipbuilder, as recognised by the ranking in the top three in the world in its class of the Ferguson-built Research Vessel Scotia by the major defence contractor Lockheed Martin; acknowledges that the Northlink order is vital to secure a future for the yard and its highly skilled and committed workforce, and expresses total support for Ferguson Shipbuilders in bidding for this order and future work.

Supported by: Nicola Sturgeon, Alex Neil, John Scott, Ms Sandra White, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mr Andrew Welsh, Roseanna Cunningham, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Fergus Ewing, Christine Grahame, Michael Russell, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Bruce Crawford, Mr John Swinney, Ms Margo MacDonald, Shona Robison, Dr Winnie Ewing, Mr Duncan McNeil, Brian Adam, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Fiona McLeod, Andrew Wilson, Michael Matheson, Miss Annabel Goldie, Nick Johnston, Kay Ullrich, John Young, Mr Adam Ingram, Alex Fergusson, Trish Godman, Donald Gorrie, Tricia Marwick, Tommy Sheridan, Mr David Davidson, Mr Kenneth Gibson

S1M-1028 Mr Adam Ingram: Road Traffic Fine Revenue —That the Parliament notes that over the last three financial years over £23 million has been collected by the Scottish Courts in fines for traffic offences; further notes that this money is paid to Her Majesty's Treasury in London; believes that this money should not be redirected south of the Border but should be spent in Scotland, and therefore calls upon the Scottish Executive to take steps to ensure that monies collected in fines for road traffic offences in Scotland are made available to local government to re-invest in the transport infrastructure.

Supported by: Alex Neil, Mr John Swinney, Shona Robison, Christine Grahame, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Fergus Ewing, Brian Adam, Colin Campbell, Fiona McLeod, Andrew Wilson, Michael Matheson, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Michael Russell, Ms Sandra White, Mr Gil Paterson, Donald Gorrie, Alasdair Morgan, Tricia Marwick, Fiona Hyslop, Tommy Sheridan

S1M-1025# Christine Grahame: Cashmere in Crisis—That the Parliament notes the continuing threat to the Borders cashmere industry which puts at risk 2,000 jobs directly and 40 companies with current orders worth £21 million; is not satisfied that all measures have been taken by Her Majesty’s Government through the European Commission to resolve the recurring trade dispute, and urges the Scottish Executive to convey this message in the strongest possible terms to Her Majesty’s Government.

Supported by: Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mr John Swinney, Ms Margo MacDonald, Alex Neil, Brian Adam, Michael Russell, Shona Robison, Dr Winnie Ewing, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Fergus Ewing, Colin Campbell, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Andrew Wilson, Michael Matheson, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Ms Sandra White, Mr Gil Paterson, Robin Harper, Tricia Marwick, Fiona Hyslop

S1M-1023# Mr Andrew Welsh: Failure to Reinstate Arbroath to Assisted Area Status—That the Parliament notes with concern the decision not to reinstate Arbroath to the Assisted Area boundary proposals; recognises the strength of Arbroath’s case for re-inclusion and the potentially devastating effect exclusion could have on the local economy; understands that, whilst this is a reserved matter, the Scottish Executive has worked closely with the Scotland Office and the Department of Trade and Industry in formulating the Assisted Area map in Scotland; requests that the Scottish Executive state clearly the criteria on which this decision was made, and invites the Executive to seek reconsideration of this decision.

Supported by: Richard Lochhead, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Irene McGugan, Alex Neil, Shona Robison, Christine Grahame, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Brian Adam, Colin Campbell, Mr John Swinney, Fiona McLeod, Andrew Wilson, Alex Johnstone, Ms Sandra White, Mr Gil Paterson, Tommy Sheridan, Ben Wallace

S1M-1022 Tommy Sheridan: North Lanarkshire Council Direct Labour Organisation—That the Parliament notes the improved performance of North Lanarkshire Council Direct Labour Organisation (DLO) which produced a surplus of £1.59 million in financial year 1999-2000 and is estimated to produce a surplus of £1.457 million in the current financial year, despite being expected to trade internally for only nine months; congratulates the workforce for their tremendous efforts in turning around a serious deficit two years ago into a healthy surplus, which will provide extra finance for North Lanarkshire Council either to improve council services to the citizens of North Lanarkshire or reduce any council tax rises for the citizens of the area; calls upon the Scottish Executive in the light of this excellent performance by the DLO workforce to lift the statutory determination which is forcing the council to privatise its DLO service and workforce; recognises the immense benefits to local authority areas of DLOs, and believes that the current statutory determination being imposed on North Lanarkshire is completely unnecessary and does not represent best value for the citizens of the North Lanarkshire Council area.

S1M-1021 Mr Jamie Stone: Salmon Farming Industry—That the Parliament notes the vital contribution to the fragile local economy of Sutherland made by Scottish-owned salmon farming companies and urges the Scottish Executive to examine ways that the regulatory framework as applied to the salmon farming industry can be streamlined and simplified for the benefit of the industry, environment and ultimately customers.

Supported by: Nora Radcliffe, Donald Gorrie, Fergus Ewing, John Scott

S1M-1020 Richard Lochhead: British-Irish Council and Aberdeen—That the Parliament calls upon the Scottish Executive to choose the City of Aberdeen as the location for the first meeting in Scotland of the British-Irish council, in recognition of the contribution made to the forging of links between Scotland and Ireland by the University of Aberdeen’s recently established Research Institute of Irish and Scottish Studies under the stewardship of Professor Tom Devine, and congratulates the Institute on the success of its recent Irish-Scottish Forum which brought politicians, academics, journalists and others together for discussion.

Supported by: David McLetchie, Fiona McLeod, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Nora Radcliffe, Alex Neil, Irene McGugan, Brian Adam, Mr Mike Rumbles, Alex Johnstone, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Shona Robison, Colin Campbell, Andrew Wilson, Michael Matheson, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-1018 Colin Campbell: German Closure of Nuclear Power Stations—That the Parliament notes that the German Government has reached agreement with its nuclear industry companies to terminate the operation of its nuclear power generating stations within their current life-span and that within 20 years the hazard of nuclear generated power will no longer be present in Germany; congratulates the German Government on this environmentally progressive step, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to make representations to Her Majesty’s Government to consider a similar policy in these isles.

Supported by: Mr Kenneth Gibson, Michael Russell, Tommy Sheridan, Linda Fabiani, Fiona McLeod, Richard Lochhead, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Alex Neil, Mr Gil Paterson, Ms Margo MacDonald, Ms Sandra White, Mr Andrew Welsh, Roseanna Cunningham, Fergus Ewing, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Christine Grahame, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Bruce Crawford, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Mr John Swinney, Shona Robison, Nicola Sturgeon, Dr Winnie Ewing, Brian Adam, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Andrew Wilson, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-1017 Mr Brian Monteith: Healthy Fathering Initiative—That the Parliament notes that Sunday 18 June is the first "Fathers Day" of the new Millennium; welcomes the role of the Healthy Fathering Initiative project initiated by the Aberlour Child Care Trust in promoting better ways to involve fathers in their children’s lives, and recognises the important input of fathers to a stable family life.

Supported by: David McLetchie, Phil Gallie, Nora Radcliffe

S1M-1016 Nick Johnston: Smoking Risks—That the Parliament notes the research by Dr Caroline Blackwell of Edinburgh University, which shows that babies of parents who smoke are at risk of developing meningitis; further notes that Meningococcal septicaemia is the second biggest killer of children aged under 4; regrets the less than helpful propaganda of smoking pressure groups, particularly with regard to passive smoking, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to do all in its power to curb smoking and to target more effective health campaigns at 25-35 year olds.

Supported by: Ben Wallace, Mary Scanlon, Tommy Sheridan, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Pauline McNeill, Richard Lochhead, Nora Radcliffe, Robert Brown, Alex Fergusson, Donald Gorrie, Mr Michael McMahon, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Christine Grahame, Brian Adam, Fiona McLeod, Michael Matheson, Mr David Davidson, Fergus Ewing, Robin Harper, Dr Richard Simpson

S1M-1013# Alex Neil: North Lanarkshire DLO—That the Parliament believes that the Scottish Executive should take urgent action to (a) stop the privatisation of the North Lanarkshire Direct Labour Organisation (DLO), (b) state who was responsible for issuing a 19B Notice to North Lanarkshire Council, (c) retract the 19B Notice with immediate effect and (d) carry out an investigation into the implications of privatisation of the DLO for the tax payer.

Supported by: Linda Fabiani, Michael Matheson, Mr Gil Paterson, Tommy Sheridan, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Michael Russell, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Christine Grahame, Brian Adam, Colin Campbell, Fiona McLeod, Andrew Wilson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Ms Sandra White

S1M-1012 Mr Keith Harding: Job Losses at Glenrothes, Fife—That the Parliament notes with regret that Canon Manufacturing UK Ltd is to cease production at its Glenrothes plant with the loss of almost 200 jobs and welcomes the setting up of a task force involving the local authority and enterprise agencies in a bid to help the workforce find alternative employment as soon as possible.

Supported by: Nick Johnston, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Phil Gallie, Mr Gil Paterson, Andrew Wilson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Alex Fergusson, Mr Brian Monteith

S1M-1011 Michael Russell: Marr College—That the Parliament congratulates Marr College, Troon on its outstanding sporting success in the 1999-2000 session, which includes the Scottish schoolgirls championship in hockey, the award to its 1st XV rugby team of the Institute of Chartered Accountants Scottish Rugby Magazine "Team of the Year" award and no less than four Scottish Championships in volleyball, as well as two runner up awards, and expresses its concern that such excellence will be at risk if proposed staffing cuts eliminate elements of extra curricular sports, particularly in the area of girls’ hockey where the current Scottish Champions may not even be able to defend their title in the coming season.

Supported by: John Scott, Fiona McLeod, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Phil Gallie, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Colin Campbell, Alex Neil, Andrew Wilson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Donald Gorrie, Mr Kenneth Gibson

S1M-1010 Colin Campbell: Royal Ordnance Factory, Bishopton—That the Parliament supports the workforce of the Royal Ordnance Factory, Bishopton in their efforts to retain munitions propellant manufacturing in the United Kingdom.

Supported by: Mr Kenneth Gibson, Ms Margo MacDonald, Mr Andrew Welsh, Michael Matheson, Ms Sandra White, Roseanna Cunningham, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Nicola Sturgeon, Christine Grahame, Andrew Wilson, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Tricia Marwick, Fergus Ewing, Fiona Hyslop, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Michael Russell, Linda Fabiani, Alasdair Morgan, Fiona McLeod, Mr Adam Ingram, Phil Gallie, Alex Neil, Donald Gorrie, Mr Gil Paterson, Shona Robison, Dr Winnie Ewing, Brian Adam R, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Alex Fergusson, Miss Annabel Goldie, Ben Wallace

S1M-1005# John Scott: Ailsa Troon Shipyard—That the Parliament notes with grave concern the threat posed to 95 jobs at Ailsa Troon shipbuilders caused by the delay by the Ministry of Defence in giving clearance for the shipyard to commence construction of the balance of an order for 10 landing craft, and asks the Scottish Executive to make representations to Her Majesty’s Government to bring forward the landing craft contracts.

Supported by: Mr Murray Tosh, David Mundell, Alex Johnstone, Alex Fergusson, Phil Gallie, David McLetchie, Michael Russell, Tommy Sheridan, Mr Jamie McGrigor, Mr Brian Monteith, Nick Johnston, Mr Adam Ingram, Alex Neil, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Shona Robison, Dr Winnie Ewing, Christine Grahame, Colin Campbell, Andrew Wilson, Michael Matheson, Mr David Davidson, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Ms Sandra White, Euan Robson, Bill Aitken, Mary Scanlon

S1M-1003 Mr Adam Ingram: Dog Fouling—That the Parliament believes that the provisions of the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 with regard to the offence of dog fouling are insufficient to control the behaviour of irresponsible dog owners and to protect the public against the growing health menace caused by dog fouling; notes that the provisions of Westminster legislation contained in the Dogs (Fouling of Land) Act 1996 make it an offence not to clean up after one’s dog in designated public places and allows local authorities to authorise contracted dog wardens to issue fixed penalty notices to offenders, and believes that equivalent legislation in Scotland should be introduced to effectively deter and punish dog fouling offences.

Supported by: Mr Kenneth Gibson, Michael Russell, Nora Radcliffe, Robert Brown, Alex Neil, Donald Gorrie, Mr Gil Paterson, Brian Adam, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Andrew Wilson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Robin Harper, Ms Sandra White, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Bruce Crawford, Tricia Marwick

S1M-1002 Christine Grahame: Licence applications from Scotland regarding the Climate Change Levy—That the Parliament calls upon the Scottish Executive to make representations to Her Majesty’s Government as a matter of urgency to determine whether the projected Department of Trade and Industry estimate of 10,000 licence applications for exemptions from the Climate Change Levy as contrasted with the estimate of 600,000 by the business community has any merit and to determine the proportionate figures for Scotland.

Supported by: Fergus Ewing, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Ms Sandra White, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Alex Neil, Mr Gil Paterson, Brian Adam, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Andrew Wilson, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-1001 Christine Grahame: IT Staffing for the Administration of Climate Change Licences—That the Parliament notes that applications for exemptions from the Climate Change Levy must be lodged by December; understands that there are no provisions for slippage in meeting the deadline for exemptions of December 2000 and for the levy itself of 1 April 2001, and urges the Scottish Executive to satisfy itself that there will be sufficient IT staff recruited to process applications.

Supported by: Fergus Ewing, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Ms Sandra White, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Alex Neil, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Brian Adam, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Andrew Wilson, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-1000# Cathie Craigie: National Lottery and Coalfield Regeneration—That the Parliament notes the publication by the Department of Culture, Media and Sport of research into the impact of the National Lottery on coalfield communities; acknowledges the contribution made by coal mining and coal miners to the economic, social and political development of Scotland, and urges the Scottish Executive to work with the National Lottery Charities Board’s Scotland committee to maximise access to Lottery funding for, and work towards the regeneration of, Scottish coalfield areas, including Kilsyth and its surrounding villages.

Supported by: Dr Sylvia Jackson, Cathy Jamieson, Janis Hughes, Margaret Jamieson, Donald Gorrie, Mike Watson, Mr Jamie Stone, Mr John McAllion, Pauline McNeill, Mrs Mary Mulligan, Helen Eadie, Alex Neil, Mr Michael McMahon, Elaine Smith, Karen Whitefield, Johann Lamont, Marilyn Livingstone, Tricia Marwick, Mr Gil Paterson, Trish Godman, Dr Richard Simpson, Cathy Peattie

S1M-998 Dr Elaine Murray: Jubilee 2000—That the Parliament congratulates the Jubilee 2000 cyclists on completion of their round Britain cycle ride, organised to draw public attention to the issue of Third World debt and the need for cancellation of those countries’ debts in order that progress can be made in improving the education, housing and health services available to their citizens; notes the progress made by Her Majesty’s Government in cancelling the debt of a number of countries, and urges other G7 nations to follow suit.

Supported by: Trish Godman, Mr John McAllion, Malcolm Chisholm, Irene Oldfather, Linda Fabiani, Pauline McNeill, Mrs Mary Mulligan, Nora Radcliffe, Donald Gorrie, Mr Michael McMahon, Elaine Smith, Cathy Jamieson, Johann Lamont, Maureen Macmillan, Robin Harper, Rhoda Grant, David Mundell, Mr Murray Tosh, Alex Fergusson, Mary Scanlon

S1M-997 Mr David Davidson: Diabetes UK—That the Parliament notes the British Diabetics Association’s change of name to Diabetes UK to coincide with National Diabetes Week beginning on 12 June 2000; recognises its achievements in Scotland, and offers its encouragement in its future endeavours to maximise support for Scottish diabetics and their families.

Supported by: David Mundell, Shona Robison, Christine Grahame, Mr John McAllion, Tommy Sheridan, Mr Jamie McGrigor, David McLetchie, Irene McGugan, Michael Russell, Pauline McNeill, Richard Lochhead, Mr Adam Ingram, Phil Gallie, Robert Brown, Alex Fergusson, Mr Michael McMahon, Karen Whitefield, Cathy Jamieson, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Andrew Wilson, Donald Gorrie, Dr Winnie Ewing, Nick Johnston, Robin Harper, Ms Sandra White, Mary Scanlon

S1M-996 Mr Jamie Stone: "Clawback" of Private Pensions—That the Parliament notes the apparent unfairness of "clawback" which applies to some private companies’ pension schemes and calls upon the Scottish Executive to make representations to Her Majesty’s Government in order that this issue be investigated and resolved.

Supported by: Pauline McNeill, Alex Neil, Dr Winnie Ewing, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Ian Jenkins, Christine Grahame, Donald Gorrie, Fergus Ewing, Ms Sandra White, Mr Kenneth Gibson

S1M-995 Dr Sylvia Jackson: Renewable Energy and Domestic Wind Turbines—That the Parliament recognises the tremendous economic potential and benefits to the environment that renewable energy can bring to Scotland; notes that the reduction to five per cent of VAT on the installation of energy saving materials excludes domestic wind turbines, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to show its commitment to renewable energy by making representations to the UK Government to change this glaring anomaly, in order to benefit both the Scottish environment and the Scottish economy.

Supported by: Elaine Thomson, Linda Fabiani, Cathy Jamieson, Margaret Jamieson, Donald Gorrie, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Mike Watson, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Mr Jamie Stone, Rhoda Grant, Cathy Peattie, Mr John McAllion, Tommy Sheridan, Maureen Macmillan, Alasdair Morgan, Fiona McLeod, Pauline McNeill, Richard Lochhead, Mrs Mary Mulligan, Mr Adam Ingram, Robert Brown, Alex Neil, Dr Winnie Ewing, Elaine Smith, Marilyn Livingstone, Ian Jenkins, Christine Grahame, Brian Adam, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Scott Barrie, Malcolm Chisholm, Ms Sandra White, Mr Gil Paterson, Trish Godman, Dr Elaine Murray, Ms Margo MacDonald, Dr Richard Simpson

S1M-993 Dorothy-Grace Elder: Glasgow the Caring City: International Relief Aid—That the Parliament congratulates "Glasgow the Caring City: International Relief Aid" on the remarkable sum of £2 million worth of aid raised for Kosovo and conveys its admiration for the heartening manner in which the Scottish faiths have worked together on this humanitarian project, namely the Church of Scotland, the Glasgow Archdiocese of the Roman Catholic Church, the Jewish communities of Glasgow and the Muslim communities of Glasgow.

Supported by: Christine Grahame, Ms Sandra White, Michael Matheson, Andrew Wilson, Michael Russell, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Alex Neil, Ms Margo MacDonald, Dennis Canavan, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Shona Robison, Fiona McLeod, Pauline McNeill, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Mr Gil Paterson, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh

S1M-992# Mr Jamie McGrigor: Lingerbay Quarry Planning Application—That the Parliament notes with concern the delay in reaching a decision over the outstanding planning application for the Lingerbay Quarry, Harris; notes that the original planning inquiry was concluded in June 1995; agrees that the delay in reaching a decision is both unacceptable and is causing substantial uncertainty throughout the Western Isles; further notes that the First Minister gave an assurance at a public meeting in 1999 in Stornaway that the decision would be reached in a matter of months, and asks that the Scottish Executive treat the matter of reaching a decision as a priority and inform the Parliament of its timetable for doing so.

Supported by: Mr Brian Monteith, David Mundell, David McLetchie, Mr Murray Tosh, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh, Alex Johnstone, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Mr David Davidson, Bill Aitken, Miss Annabel Goldie, Nick Johnston, Mary Scanlon, John Young, Mr Keith Harding, Mr John Munro, Mr Jamie Stone, Michael Russell, Linda Fabiani, Phil Gallie, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Alex Fergusson, Donald Gorrie

S1M-991# Christine Grahame: Impact of Climate Change Levy on Borders Economy—That the Parliament recognises that many small- to medium-sized businesses, particularly those located in rural areas, are unaware that the Climate Change Levy (CCL) is due to be imposed on 1 April 2001 and that this will have a substantial adverse impact on their operating costs and put many businesses in jeopardy; notes that it will affect, in particular, textiles, farming and electronics manufacture in areas such as the Scottish Borders, and urges the Scottish Executive, as a matter of urgency, to review the whole issue of CCL which will penalise even those who are already meeting Kyoto targets for carbon emissions and those who have no carbon emissions from their business enterprises.

Supported by: Fergus Ewing, Linda Fabiani, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Michael Russell, Fiona McLeod, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Alex Fergusson, Alex Neil, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Ms Sandra White, Mr Kenneth Gibson

S1M-990 Mr Duncan Hamilton: Highland Council Housing Stock Transfer—That the Parliament commends Highland Council for the recent public consultation exercise carried out to examine the options available for the future management and ownership of the council’s housing stock; recognises the overwhelming satisfaction of Highland Council tenants with their council landlord and the desire of these tenants for ownership and management of their homes to remain with the council; notes the injustice felt by Highland Council that solutions to the indebtedness of councils are only available if stock transfer takes place, and calls upon the Scottish Executive and Her Majesty’s Government to address the council’s housing debt to enable it to continue to provide a quality housing service.

Supported by: Fergus Ewing, Tommy Sheridan, Robin Harper, Donald Gorrie, Michael Russell, Richard Lochhead, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Alex Neil, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr John Munro, Brian Adam, Andrew Wilson, Michael Matheson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Dr Winnie Ewing, Ms Sandra White, Fiona Hyslop, Mr Kenneth Gibson

S1M-989 Dorothy-Grace Elder: Scotswoman of the Year—That the Parliament recognises the achievements of Annette MacArthur, Lorraine Mann, Angela Slater, Catherine Campbell, Khadija Coll, Ina Rennie, Lorraine Russell, Janice Eaglesham, Syma Jamil and Isabel Webster in reaching the final of the Scotswoman of the Year Awards; applauds the Evening Times for its hosting of this event for the 38th year, and congratulates Catherine Campbell on becoming Scotswoman of the Year and, through her tremendous work as a breast cancer Sister at Stobhill Hospital, highlighting the suffering of the many women who are afflicted by this terrible illness.

Supported by: Christine Grahame, Alex Neil, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Colin Campbell, Kay Ullrich, Roseanna Cunningham, Michael Russell, Mr John Swinney, Ms Margo MacDonald, Ms Sandra White, Nicola Sturgeon, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Andrew Wilson, Linda Fabiani, Donald Gorrie, Fiona Hyslop, Fiona McLeod, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Mr Gil Paterson, Michael Matheson, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-986# Tommy Sheridan: Coffee Shops—That the Parliament supports the Westminster motion sponsored by Paul Flynn MP that cannabis coffee shops should be set up along the Dutch model; recognises that doing so would help break the connection between cannabis use and more dangerous and addictive drugs like heroin; further notes that such a measure would effectively take the cannabis market out of housing estates and residential areas and into licensed premises which could be properly regulated; further recognises that such a move would greatly reduce the overall harm caused by the illegal market in cannabis, and believes that the Scottish Executive should put Scotland at the forefront of such an experiment.

Supported by: Donald Gorrie

S1M-982# Christine Grahame: Alcohol Misuse—That the Parliament recognises that there are estimated to be 200,000 people in Scotland who misuse alcohol; notes that in the past 25 years there has been an increase in the number of deaths for which alcohol is the recorded cause of death of 760% for females and 552% for males; notes further that the figure for the number of children using alcohol is up to 64% in the 12 to 15 age group, and urges the Scottish Executive to give a higher profile to this addiction which has substantial costs both financially and otherwise to both the individual, their families and society at large.

Supported by: Mr Kenneth Macintosh, Alex Neil, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Tommy Sheridan, Robin Harper, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Andrew Wilson, Dr Elaine Murray, Fergus Ewing, Linda Fabiani, Michael Russell, Shona Robison, Irene McGugan, Donald Gorrie, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Ms Sandra White, Rhoda Grant, Maureen Macmillan, Nick Johnston, Fiona Hyslop, Fiona McLeod, Pauline McNeill, Richard Lochhead, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Nora Radcliffe, Robert Brown, Mr Gil Paterson, Nicola Sturgeon, Brian Adam, Michael Matheson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Ms Margo MacDonald, Mary Scanlon, David Mundell

S1M-981# Fiona McLeod: Scotland Bid For Euro 2008—That the Parliament recognises that hosting a major sporting event like the European Football Championships brings economic and social benefit to the host nation and resolves to work with all other interested parties and organisations to develop a bid for Scotland to host the 2008 European Football Championships.

Supported by: Mr Kenneth Gibson, Mr Andrew Welsh, Tommy Sheridan, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Andrew Wilson, Fergus Ewing, Linda Fabiani, Shona Robison, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Ms Sandra White, Irene McGugan, Richard Lochhead, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Alex Neil, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr John Swinney, Nicola Sturgeon, Brian Adam, Michael Matheson, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Dr Winnie Ewing, Fiona Hyslop

S1M-980 Christine Grahame: Web-cast of Parliament Proceedings—That the Parliament recommends that the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body continue web-casts without interruption in order that its broadcasting unit remains at the cutting edge of parliamentary broadcasting.

Supported by: Alex Neil, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Tommy Sheridan, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Andrew Wilson, Linda Fabiani, Fergus Ewing, Shona Robison, Michael Russell, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Mr John McAllion, Fiona McLeod, Pauline McNeill, Richard Lochhead, Mr Michael McMahon, Nicola Sturgeon, Ms Sandra White, Tricia Marwick

S1M-979# Ian Jenkins: Holocaust Remembrance—That the Parliament welcomes the opening to the public of the Holocaust exhibition at the Imperial War Museum on 7 June; acknowledges the four years of preparation which has gone into the creation of the exhibition; recognises the importance of educational and cultural programmes and activities in promoting knowledge and remembrance of the suffering experienced during the Holocaust; recognises the particular importance of film, literature and the arts in remembrance of the Holocaust, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to work in partnership with public bodies, academic institutions, cultural organisations, community groups and religious organisations to promote a national programme of Holocaust remembrance.

Supported by: Mr Kenneth Macintosh, Hugh Henry, David Mundell, Helen Eadie, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Karen Whitefield, Mr Andrew Welsh, Tommy Sheridan, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Andrew Wilson, Michael Russell, Dr Elaine Murray, Fergus Ewing, Shona Robison, Mary Scanlon, Donald Gorrie, Trish Godman, Mrs Mary Mulligan, Mr Jamie Stone, Rhoda Grant, Mr Brian Monteith, Cathy Jamieson, Mr John McAllion, Maureen Macmillan, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Nick Johnston, Fiona McLeod, Pauline McNeill, Richard Lochhead, Alex Neil, Mr Michael McMahon, Christine Grahame, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh, Michael Matheson, Mr David Davidson, Mr Gil Paterson, Ms Sandra White, Dr Richard Simpson, Cathy Peattie, Ben Wallace

S1M-978 Dorothy-Grace Elder: Volunteers Week—That the Parliament expresses its admiration and gratitude in Volunteers Week for the dedication of the hundreds of volunteers who keep the Children’s Panel system going in Glasgow and throughout Scotland; acknowledges the sensitivity and kindness of panel members and reporters in handling cases, some of which are harrowing, with wisdom and genuine concern, and believes that the Children’s Panel system has been an outstanding success.

Supported by: Christine Grahame, Alex Neil, Tommy Sheridan, Robin Harper, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Andrew Wilson, Shona Robison, Donald Gorrie, Michael Russell, Irene McGugan, Pauline McNeill, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Nora Radcliffe, Robert Brown, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Fiona Hyslop

S1M-977# Michael Matheson: Nuclear Test Veterans—That the Parliament recognises the role played by service personnel during the UK’s nuclear test programme in the 1950’s; notes the possible correlation between participation in the tests and the development of subsequent illnesses; congratulates the British Nuclear Test Veterans Association on highlighting the concerns of test veterans and Sue Rabbit-Roff on her research into the health effects associated with participation in the tests; further notes the actions of those governments which have compensated their nuclear veterans, and invites the Scottish Executive to make representations to Her Majesty’s Government calling for suitable compensation for British Nuclear Veterans.

Supported by: Mr Andrew Welsh, Colin Campbell, Bruce Crawford, Brian Adam, Fergus Ewing, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Roseanna Cunningham, Andrew Wilson, Ms Sandra White, Tricia Marwick, Christine Grahame, Alex Neil, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Tommy Sheridan, Robin Harper, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Shona Robison, Irene McGugan, Donald Gorrie, Michael Russell, Cathy Peattie, Mr John McAllion, Linda Fabiani, Fiona Hyslop, Fiona McLeod, Richard Lochhead, Nicola Sturgeon, Mr Adam Ingram, Robert Brown, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr John Swinney, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Kay Ullrich, Dr Winnie Ewing

S1M-976# Johann Lamont: Glasgow Internal Transport Service—That the Parliament notes the importance of an effective and responsive local authority internal transport service to many people with learning disabilities, physical disabilities and special needs in Pollok, Glasgow and Scotland; congratulates the users, carers and providers of Glasgow’s internal transport service in building a crucial partnership through the Parallel Transport Liaison Group which is shaping the development of the service and was central in designing the pioneering fleet of buses which are now coming into use; applauds Glasgow City Council for its willingness to listen to and work with those who know best what service needs are and urges the Scottish Executive and the appropriate committees of the Parliament to examine the process developed in Glasgow in order to inform best practice across Scotland, a practice which empowers the users of the service and, as a consequence, ensures that the service puts the users at the centre and delivers real "best value".

Supported by: Tommy Sheridan, Robin Harper, Malcolm Chisholm, Mike Watson, Margaret Jamieson, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Elaine Smith, Dr Sylvia Jackson, Cathy Jamieson, Mr John McAllion, Pauline McNeill, Nora Radcliffe, Robert Brown, Ms Sandra White, Trish Godman, Dr Richard Simpson

S1M-964# Bruce Crawford: Gulf War Related Illnesses—That the Parliament notes the findings in the British Medical Journal that there may be a strong and identifiable link between the multiple vaccines given to Gulf War troops and the enigmatic and devastating illnesses known as Gulf War Related Illnesses; further notes that this study reinforces several American and Canadian studies which have found a link between service in the Gulf and this illness; believes that, in the light of these recent findings, based on the cases of 900 soldiers, now is an appropriate time to proceed with parliamentary action; acknowledges the disproportionate number of Scottish troops and units who fought in the Gulf War and the resulting disproportionate toll of Gulf War Related Illnesses on Scottish veterans and, in the light of this, urges the Scottish Executive to make representations to Her Majesty's Government to explore all available avenues to alleviate veterans’ ill health and poverty.

Supported by: Mrs Margaret Ewing, Colin Campbell, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Fergus Ewing, Michael Russell, Christine Grahame, Shona Robison, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Tommy Sheridan, Alasdair Morgan, Alex Neil, Mr Andrew Welsh, Robin Harper, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Andrew Wilson, Irene McGugan, Donald Gorrie, Dennis Canavan, Kay Ullrich, Linda Fabiani, Roseanna Cunningham, Michael Matheson, Nicola Sturgeon, Tricia Marwick, Fiona McLeod, Ms Margo MacDonald, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Richard Lochhead, Fiona Hyslop, Mr Adam Ingram, Dr Winnie Ewing, Mr John Swinney, Ms Sandra White

S1M-963 Dorothy-Grace Elder: Potential Bankruptcy of Glasgow Rape Crisis Centre—That the Parliament deplores and denounces as disgraceful the action of boxing promoter Frank Warren in attempting to demand £10,000 court costs from Glasgow Rape Crisis Centre, an organisation already starved of funds which could have its work with raped women endangered through the actions of a man who is promoting a fight for a millionaire rapist; supports the principled stand of Glasgow Rape Crisis Centre, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to support it in every possible way.

Supported by: Shona Robison, Tommy Sheridan, Alex Neil, Robin Harper, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Andrew Wilson, Donald Gorrie, Michael Russell, Fiona McLeod, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Ms Sandra White

S1M-962# Shona Robison: Travel Dundee—That the Parliament notes with concern the actions of Travel Dundee in removing or reducing the bus services on certain routes in Dundee; believes that this reduction in service will affect many people without access to a car, particularly the elderly, and urges Travel Dundee to reconsider this decision as a matter of urgency.

Supported by: Tommy Sheridan, Alex Neil, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Andrew Wilson, Irene McGugan, Fiona McLeod, Richard Lochhead, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Mr Gil Paterson, Brian Adam, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Ms Sandra White, Mr Kenneth Gibson

S1M-961 Michael Russell: Parthenon Marbles—That the Parliament notes the latest request by the Greek Government for the return of the Parthenon Marbles, which were unlawfully taken from Turkish-occupied Athens almost 200 years ago and which are now held by the British Museum in London; rejects claims by the British Museum that they can look after them more effectively than the people of Greece, these being both patronising and also undermined by recent evidence of defective cleaning work carried out by the Museum on the Marbles; believes that, just as the Scots have received back the Stone of Destiny, so the people of Greece have a right to receive back one of their most important artistic and cultural treasures, and calls upon Her Majesty's Government to return the Marbles to their rightful home in Greece.

Supported by: Shona Robison, Alasdair Morgan, Alex Neil, Andrew Wilson, Fergus Ewing, Linda Fabiani, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Irene McGugan, Donald Gorrie, Ms Sandra White, Bruce Crawford, Richard Lochhead, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Mr Gil Paterson, Dr Winnie Ewing, Mr John Swinney, Nicola Sturgeon, Colin Campbell, Michael Matheson, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-960# Christine Grahame: Borders Textile Industry—That the Parliament, in recognising the economic plight of the Borders textiles industry, notes the continuing decline with the recent announcement of a further 290 jobs lost with the closure of Laidlaw and Fairgrieve Ltd; further notes the £100 million provided for the former Rover workers, and recommends that the Scottish Executive make immediate representations to Her Majesty's Government for substantial funding to support and develop this core industry.

Supported by: Michael Russell, Colin Campbell, Mr John Swinney, Shona Robison, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Tommy Sheridan, Dr Winnie Ewing, Alex Neil, Robin Harper, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Andrew Wilson, Fergus Ewing, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Fiona Hyslop, Fiona McLeod, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Mr Gil Paterson, Nicola Sturgeon, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Ms Sandra White

S1M-953 Dorothy-Grace Elder: Cessation of Silicone Implant Operations, Scotland—That the Parliament notes the concern of the European Commission over silicone implant operations; urges the Scottish Executive to demand an immediate cessation of all silicone implant operations in the NHS and in private hospitals in Scotland in accordance with the wishes of campaigners in Scotland and pending the outcome of EC investigations, bearing in mind that around 200,000 legal cases are pending world-wide against silicone manufacturers; further notes that Canada, America and other countries have banned these operations, that Her Majesty's Government’s refusal to ban was controversial after challenges to the impartiality of a Department of Health investigation in 1998, an investigation into female breast implants which was conducted by six male doctors and nine male observers, with women doctors, patients’ groups and nurses excluded from serving on the so called "independent review" and that the same branch of the Health Department which had previously cleared silicone was reporting for a fourth time on the issue, clearing silicone despite pleas from American doctors not to take risks America refused to take, and finally notes that American doctors were so concerned at Her Majesty's Government’s attitude that they flew to London in 1998 to give evidence against silicone, pleaded with Her Majesty's Government not to risk endangering women’s health and cited cases of sick and dying implant patients in the US and of well known women having implants removed.

Supported by: Tommy Sheridan, Michael Russell, Mr Adam Ingram, Alex Neil, Ms Sandra White, Tricia Marwick

S1M-951# Dorothy-Grace Elder: Cancellation of Post Operative Care Appointments at the Glasgow Royal Infirmary—That the Parliament notes claims by the Heart Transplant Patient Support Group that post operative patients have discovered on arrival at Glasgow Royal Infirmary that their appointments have been cancelled; further notes that some of these patients are travelling from as far away as Dunbar, Musselburgh and Dingwall, and believes that there should be an urgent investigation concerning how post operative patients with heart transplants are being dealt with in check ups at Glasgow Royal Infirmary.

Supported by: Donald Gorrie, Shona Robison, Andrew Wilson, Alex Neil, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Tommy Sheridan, Fiona McLeod, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Ms Sandra White

S1M-950 Ben Wallace: Dunkirk 60th Anniversary—That the Parliament acknowledges the bravery and heroism of all those involved in the Dunkirk evacuation, expresses its deep gratitude for their actions and passes on its full support and best wishes for all those involved in the 60th anniversary commemoration.

Supported by: Bill Aitken, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Mr Brian Monteith, Bristow Muldoon, David Mundell, Donald Gorrie, Linda Fabiani, Mr Michael McMahon, David McLetchie, Mr Keith Harding, Dr Elaine Murray, Mr Jamie McGrigor, Andrew Wilson, Dr Richard Simpson, Brian Adam, Mr Murray Tosh, Ms Margaret Curran, Trish Godman, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Mr John McAllion, Dr Winnie Ewing, Phil Gallie, Michael Russell, Nick Johnston, Fergus Ewing, Fiona McLeod, Alex Neil, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh, Mr David Davidson, Ms Sandra White, Mary Scanlon

S1M-949 Mr Brian Monteith: Greenock Morton Football Club—That the Parliament recognises that football plays an important part in our social culture and sporting life; recognises the important contribution made by local football clubs to the communities in which they are based; expresses concern over recent reports of developments at Greenock Morton Football Club; acknowledges that to lose a community asset such as Greenock Morton would be detrimental, not only to its supporters, but also to the community as a whole, and urges club chairman Hugh Scott either to begin to work together in close conjunction with the fans and the local community in order to alleviate all uncertainties and secure a smooth and prosperous future for Greenock Morton, including the swift delivery of the 10,000 all seater stadium that was promised to the fans some time ago, or to sell the club and all its assets, including Cappielow Stadium, to someone who can provide Greenock Morton with the prosperous future that it, and the people of Inverclyde whom it has served for 126 years, richly deserve.

Supported by: Miss Annabel Goldie, Bill Aitken, Mr Keith Harding, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Mr Jamie McGrigor, Brian Adam, John Young, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Fiona McLeod, Mary Scanlon, Michael Russell, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, David McLetchie, Mr Adam Ingram, Alex Neil, Mr David Davidson, Mr Gil Paterson, Ben Wallace

S1M-948 Mr Brian Monteith: Hosting the European Football Championship in Scotland—That the Parliament notes that the European Nations Football Championships are being hosted jointly by Belgium and the Netherlands, beginning later this month; calls upon the Scottish Football Association to hold exploratory discussions with its counterparts in Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland to examine the feasibility of the three national football associations combining to submit a joint bid to hold the Championships in 2008, and recognises that this would provide a massive boost to domestic football, the tourism industry and the reputation of Scotland world-wide.

Supported by: Bill Aitken, Mr Keith Harding, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Mr Jamie McGrigor, Mr Murray Tosh, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Brian Adam, David Mundell, Mary Scanlon, Michael Russell, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Alex Neil, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mr David Davidson, David McLetchie, Ben Wallace, Alex Johnstone, John Scott, Alex Fergusson

S1M-947 Robin Harper: OSPAR Convention—That the Parliament notes that Her Majesty’s Government is committed under the OSPAR Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic to work towards achieving substantial reductions or elimination of radioactive discharges to the north-east Atlantic by the year 2000 and concentrations in the marine environment close to zero by the year 2020; further notes that Denmark has submitted a draft decision to the annual meeting of the OSPAR Convention to be held in Copenhagen from 26 to 29 June calling for an immediate suspension of the reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel, including at Sellafield and Dounreay; notes that the Danish resolution is supported by Ireland, Iceland and Norway and, in view of the impact of the discharges on the Scottish coastline, therefore joins with Denmark in calling for an end to reprocessing and calls upon the Scottish Executive to transmit this view to Her Majesty’s Government before 26 June. R

Supported by: Donald Gorrie, Linda Fabiani, Tavish Scott, Mr John McAllion, Tommy Sheridan, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Dr Sylvia Jackson, Cathy Peattie, Alex Neil, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Mike Watson, Dr Winnie Ewing, Ms Sandra White, Fergus Ewing, Mr Gil Paterson

S1M-946# Alex Neil: STG Pension Fund—That the Parliament calls upon the trustees of the Scottish Transport Group (STG) Pension Fund to use the surpluses in the fund to provide higher pensions for the former STG employees.

Supported by: Donald Gorrie, Christine Grahame, Cathie Craigie, Mr John McAllion, Dennis Canavan, Tommy Sheridan, Alasdair Morgan, Andrew Wilson, Fergus Ewing, Fiona McLeod, Michael Russell, Elaine Smith, Dr Sylvia Jackson, Cathy Jamieson, Cathy Peattie, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Mr Gil Paterson, Brian Adam, Michael Matheson, Linda Fabiani, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Ms Sandra White, Mr John Munro, Mr Kenneth Gibson

S1M-945# Alex Neil: Dangerous Driving Offences Sentencing—That the Parliament calls upon the Scottish Executive to undertake an urgent review of its sentencing policy in relation to dangerous driving offences, in particular where a fatality has occurred.

Supported by: Donald Gorrie, Linda Fabiani, Shona Robison, Andrew Wilson, Mr John McAllion, Nora Radcliffe, Tommy Sheridan, Margaret Jamieson, Robin Harper, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Dr Elaine Murray, Fiona McLeod, Michael Russell, Ms Sandra White, Richard Lochhead, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Gil Paterson, Tricia Marwick

S1M-944 Mr Keith Harding: Retaining Rail Stations in Fife—That the Parliament calls upon the Scottish Executive to oppose and reject plans put forward in a report by consultants, The Scott Wilson Group, which recommends the closure of the rail stations at Ladybank, Markinch and Springfield in Fife.

Supported by: Donald Gorrie, Bill Aitken, Mr Jamie McGrigor, Mr Brian Monteith, Nora Radcliffe, Tommy Sheridan, Robin Harper, Nick Johnston, Alex Neil, Mr Gil Paterson, Brian Adam, Ben Wallace

S1M-943 David Mundell: Webcasts of Parliament—That the Parliament congratulates its Broadcasting, IT and Information Systems teams and their service providers on their achievements in providing a webcast service of the Parliament from Glasgow; notes the positive public reaction to the service and its ability to give greater public access to the workings of the Parliament, and looks forward to further webcast services being made available of the Parliament and its committees.

Supported by: Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Helen Eadie, Donald Gorrie, Linda Fabiani, Shona Robison, Bill Aitken, Michael Russell, Christine Grahame, David McLetchie, Alex Fergusson, Mr Keith Harding, Roseanna Cunningham, Mr Jamie McGrigor, Andrew Wilson, Dr Richard Simpson, Mr Murray Tosh, Nick Johnston, Mr Brian Monteith, Mr Duncan McNeil, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Tommy Sheridan, Margaret Jamieson, Elaine Thomson, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Fergus Ewing, Fiona Hyslop, Phil Gallie, Mary Scanlon, Rhoda Grant, Cathy Jamieson, Cathy Peattie, Richard Lochhead, Alex Neil, Fiona McLeod, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh, Mr David Davidson, Ben Wallace

S1M-941 Nick Johnston: Unrest at Glenochil Prison—That the Parliament notes with dismay the outbreak of unrest at Glenochil Prison in Clackmannanshire, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to initiate measures which will eradicate drugs as a feature in Scotland’s prisons.

Supported by: Bill Aitken, Alex Fergusson, Mr Keith Harding, Mr Brian Monteith, Phil Gallie, David Mundell, David McLetchie, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh, Mr Murray Tosh, Alex Johnstone, Miss Annabel Goldie, Mr David Davidson, Ben Wallace, John Scott, Mary Scanlon, Mr Jamie McGrigor, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton

S1M-940 Trish Godman: Use of Mobile Phones on Trains—That the Parliament deplores the willingness with which many mobile phone users on trains divulge intimate details of their domestic and business affairs to their fellow passengers; notes the increase in the frequency of mobile phone use on trains and the constant inconvenience to non-phone using passengers, and calls upon the rail operators to designate phone free zones on all trains.

Supported by: Ms Margo MacDonald, Donald Gorrie, Mr Michael McMahon, Des McNulty, Mr John McAllion, Robin Harper, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Fergus Ewing, Mr Mike Rumbles, Maureen Macmillan, Richard Lochhead, Alex Neil

S1M-939 Tommy Sheridan: Animal Welfare and the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals—That the Parliament expresses concern at the serious allegations raised by reputable organisations and individuals in relation to animal welfare and the activities of the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals; notes the highlighting of these serious concerns by the Sunday Mail newspaper, and believes that a full public inquiry into these allegations is required to ensure the highest possible quality and standard of care is being delivered to animals in care throughout Scotland.

Supported by: Mr Kenneth Gibson, Roseanna Cunningham, Alex Neil, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Michael Matheson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Gil Paterson

S1M-938 Mr Adam Ingram: Expenditure on Beach and Coastal Maintenance—That the Parliament notes that only three of Scotland’s beaches have won the European blue flag award; further notes that a mere £0.6 million has been spent by the Scottish Executive on the upkeep of Scotland’s coastline, and that Scotland’s councils have spent considerably more than this on coastal protection and maintenance, despite severe financial constraints; believes that current expenditure levels are insufficient to ensure that more Scottish beaches reach the blue flag standard, and therefore calls upon the Scottish Executive to reconsider budget allocations with a view to ensuring that local authorities can bring more of Scotland’s beaches up to standard.

Supported by: Donald Gorrie, Linda Fabiani, Shona Robison, Christine Grahame, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Roseanna Cunningham, Andrew Wilson, Mr Murray Tosh, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Nora Radcliffe, Alasdair Morgan, Robin Harper, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Michael Russell, Richard Lochhead, Tricia Marwick, Alex Neil, Mr Gil Paterson, Fiona McLeod, Michael Matheson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Ms Sandra White

S1M-937# Alex Fergusson: Galloway Food Producers Outlet—That the Parliament notes the success of the first Galloway Food Festival held in Wigtown on 27 May 2000; further notes the proposal which emerged from that festival to establish a local food producers’ retail outlet at Gretna, and believes that the Scottish Executive should assist in the initial funding of such an outlet through its pilot project, recently established with organisations and producers in Dumfries and Galloway, to look at developing viable markets for locally produced goods, as referred to in the answer to parliamentary question S1W-6139. R

Supported by: David Mundell, Donald Gorrie, Bill Aitken, Dr Elaine Murray, Mr Jamie McGrigor, Michael Russell, Mr Murray Tosh, Alex Johnstone, Mr Brian Monteith, Alasdair Morgan, Christine Grahame, Nick Johnston, Phil Gallie, Robin Harper, John Scott, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Mr Adam Ingram, Alex Neil, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh, Mr David Davidson

S1M-936 Mr Keith Harding: Top Award for Fife Beaches—That the Parliament congratulates the Kingdom of Fife on providing all three of the Scottish beaches, at Silver Sands, Aberdour, West Sands, St Andrews and Elie beach, which have been awarded the European Blue Flag, in recognition of their clean water and beach management standards.

Supported by: Bill Aitken, David Mundell, Mr Jamie McGrigor, Mr Brian Monteith, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Nick Johnston, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh, Mr David Davidson

S1M-934 Irene McGugan: The New Testament in Scots—That the Parliament acknowledges that in translating the New Testament into Scots, William L Lorimer undertook the challenging project of recreating Scots prose and scrutinised upwards of 180 translations in more than 20 languages; notes that his work demonstrates the range, vigour and vitality of which Scots prose is capable, and is not only a remarkable translation but a considerable accomplishment and a notable contribution to our literary and linguistic heritage, and commends Canongate Books for reprinting this publication after 14 years, by popular demand.


At the Pairliament awns at, bi owersettin the New Testament inti Scots, William L Lorimer tuik on the wechtie darg o makin Scots prose anew, an leukit at abuin a hunner an echtie owersettins in mair nor twentie leids; taks tent at his wark shaws the braidth, pouer an virr at Scots prose haes in’t, an is baith a byordnar owersettin an a byordnar accomplishment, as weil’s addin wurthilie til oor leiterarie an linguistic heritage; an commens Canongate Books for reprentin this efter 14 year, bi popular deman.

Supported by: Donald Gorrie, Linda Fabiani, Christine Grahame, Andrew Wilson, Brian Adam, Mr Brian Monteith, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Nora Radcliffe, Robin Harper, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Fiona McLeod, Michael Russell, Cathy Peattie, Richard Lochhead, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Alex Neil, Mr Gil Paterson, Michael Matheson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Bruce Crawford, Mary Scanlon

S1M-933# Mr John McAllion: Crown Prosecution and the Piper Alpha Disaster—That the Parliament notes that, following the publication of the Cullen Inquiry into the Piper Alpha Disaster, the Crown Office decided not to prosecute the Occidental Oil Company; congratulates Mr Gavin Cleland for his unceasing campaign to hold successive Lord Advocates to account for this decision, and believes that the relationship between the Scottish Parliament and the Crown Office requires further consideration in the light of decisions on the prosecution of companies over breaches of health and safety legislation.

Supported by: Donald Gorrie, Linda Fabiani, Andrew Wilson, Elaine Smith, Alex Neil, Nora Radcliffe, Tommy Sheridan, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Tricia Marwick, Dr Elaine Murray, Pauline McNeill, Fiona McLeod, Michael Russell, Ms Sandra White, Cathy Jamieson, Cathy Peattie, Richard Lochhead, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Gil Paterson, Johann Lamont, Brian Adam, Michael Matheson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mike Watson, Shona Robison, Helen Eadie, Christine Grahame, Fergus Ewing, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Ms Margaret Curran, Paul Martin

S1M-932# Scott Barrie: Clean Beaches—That the Parliament notes that only three beaches in Scotland have been awarded the European Blue Flag for clean water; that all of the three beaches are in Fife, at Aberdour, Elie and St Andrews; congratulates East of Scotland Water and particularly Fife Council on their efforts in this regard, and believes that the Scottish Executive, the three water utilities and all coast line local authorities should work together to ensure that next year the number of Blue Flag beaches increases dramatically.

Supported by: Trish Godman, Dr Richard Simpson, Elaine Thomson, Mr John McAllion, Robin Harper, Tricia Marwick, Dr Sylvia Jackson, Cathy Jamieson, Cathy Peattie, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Gil Paterson, Karen Whitefield, Marilyn Livingstone, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Pauline McNeill

S1M-929 Alex Neil: State of the Farming Industry—That the Parliament notes the desperate situation in which Scotland’s farming community finds itself and in particular draws attention to the special plight of dairy farming, particularly in Ayrshire; calls upon the Scottish Executive to take urgent action to tackle the situation, and demands that the UK Government and the European Commission pursue policies designed to bring about a recovery in these industries.

Supported by: Tommy Sheridan, Christine Grahame, Colin Campbell, Dr Winnie Ewing, Mr Andrew Welsh, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Michael Russell, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Mr Gil Paterson, Fiona McLeod, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Robin Harper, Ms Sandra White, Brian Adam, Mr Kenneth Gibson

S1M-928# Alex Neil: Macular Disease—That the Parliament recognises the particular problems experienced by people who suffer from macular disease; notes the progress made in the implementation of the recommendation of the review of sensory impairment services, but notes the need to make more rapid progress in the implementation of a nationwide, comprehensive strategy for significantly enhancing such services, particularly in relation to education, housing aids and adaptations, transport facilities and the provision of local support workers.

Supported by: Tommy Sheridan, Donald Gorrie, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Colin Campbell, Roseanna Cunningham, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Dr Winnie Ewing, Margaret Jamieson, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, John Scott, Mr Gil Paterson, Fergus Ewing, Nicola Sturgeon, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Michael Matheson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Ms Sandra White, Brian Adam

S1M-927 Robin Harper: Bagyeli Pygmies of Cameroon—That the Parliament notes the general plight of the Bagyeli Pygmies of Cameroon as a result of logging of their rainforest environment and specifically the potential dangers from development of the Chad-Cameroon oil pipeline and urges Her Majesty's Government to make representations to the World Bank, the Cameroonian Government and oil and logging companies on behalf of the Bagyeli to ensure that they are fully and independently consulted about the activities which affect them.

Supported by: Tommy Sheridan, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Donald Gorrie, Linda Fabiani, Shona Robison, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Andrew Wilson, Alex Neil, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Mr John McAllion, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Fiona Hyslop, Michael Russell, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Mr Gil Paterson, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Mike Watson, Dr Winnie Ewing, Ian Jenkins, Ms Sandra White, Fergus Ewing, Mr Kenny MacAskill

S1M-920 Richard Lochhead: GM Crops—That the Parliament condemns the decision by Nick Brown, Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food to withhold vital information from the Scottish Parliament in relation to the importing of GM seeds; recognises that had the information been passed to the Scottish Executive immediately then farmers would have been able to avoid the sowing of GM contaminated crops, and calls upon Her Majesty’s Government to finance an appropriate compensation package for Scotland’s farmers and assume responsibility for any legal action against the seed-supplier Advanta Seeds.

Supported by: Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Adam Ingram, Irene McGugan, Mr John Swinney, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Tommy Sheridan, Colin Campbell, Alex Neil, Donald Gorrie, Linda Fabiani, Shona Robison, Christine Grahame, Roseanna Cunningham, Andrew Wilson, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Alasdair Morgan, Mr Andrew Welsh, Robin Harper, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Fiona McLeod, Michael Russell, Mr Gil Paterson, Ms Sandra White, Tricia Marwick, Mr John Munro, Brian Adam

S1M-919# Fergus Ewing: Scottish Raptor Working Group—That the Parliament believes that the report of the Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions’ Raptor Working Group does not reflect the particular circumstances and problems in Scotland; believes that there should be a Scottish Raptor Working Group established and that this should include within its membership representatives from all relevant organisations and bodies especially those whose livelihood depends upon the rural economy including representatives of the Scottish Gamekeepers Association, the Scottish Landowners Federation, the Scottish Association for Country Sports, the British Association for Shooting and Conservation, the Scottish Homing Union and Scottish Natural Heritage; furthermore expresses its concern that growth in the population of certain raptors may have been at the expense of the population of pigeons, songbirds, grouse and other ground nesting birds and that certain groups espousing conservationist causes appear unwilling to accept that the protection of one bird species may result in the predation of others, and believes that the membership of any Scottish Raptor Working Group should not be dominated by such bodies professing a conservation objective.

Supported by: Dr Elaine Murray, Alex Fergusson, Colin Campbell, Mary Scanlon, Alex Neil, David Mundell, Donald Gorrie, Mr Jamie McGrigor, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Mr Brian Monteith, Dr Winnie Ewing, Phil Gallie, Mr Lloyd Quinan, David McLetchie, Mr David Davidson, Tricia Marwick, Ben Wallace

S1M-918 Michael Russell: Scottish Six O'clock News—That the Parliament notes with dissatisfaction the outcome of the review by the Governors of the BBC with regard to appropriate services to serve the devolved nations; expresses disquiet that once again the issue of the "Scottish Six" has not been adequately addressed despite support for such a programme from the Broadcasting Council for Scotland, the broadcasting trade unions, broadcasting staff and the majority of the Scottish broadcasting audience; deplores the establishment of yet another review to consider the matter, and calls upon the Board of Governors to respond to Scottish demand by authorising immediate editorial and technological preparations for the broadcast of a six o’clock national and international television news programme to be in operation by the autumn of 2000. R

Supported by: Mr John Swinney, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Irene McGugan, Colin Campbell, Alex Neil, Donald Gorrie, Linda Fabiani, Shona Robison, Christine Grahame, Roseanna Cunningham, Andrew Wilson, Brian Adam, Kay Ullrich, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Mr John McAllion, Tommy Sheridan, Alasdair Morgan, Dr Winnie Ewing, Mr Andrew Welsh, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Fergus Ewing, Fiona Hyslop, Fiona McLeod, Mr Mike Rumbles, Richard Lochhead, Nicola Sturgeon, Mr Gil Paterson, Ms Sandra White, Tricia Marwick

S1M-917 Roseanna Cunningham: Glasgow Rape Crisis Centre—That the Parliament commends and supports the Glasgow Rape Crisis Centre in its decision to seek a Judicial Review of the Home Secretary’s ruling allowing Michael Tyson to enter the UK.

Supported by: Mr Kenneth Gibson, Linda Fabiani, Nicola Sturgeon, Michael Russell, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Fiona Hyslop, Kay Ullrich, Mr John Swinney, Tommy Sheridan, Irene McGugan, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Alex Neil, Ms Sandra White, Shona Robison, Andrew Wilson, Dr Winnie Ewing, Robin Harper, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Fiona McLeod, Cathy Peattie, Tricia Marwick

S1M-916 Mrs Mary Mulligan: Whitburn Junior Football Club—That the Parliament congratulates Whitburn Junior Football Club on its excellent victory in the OVD Scottish Junior Cup Final for the first time in its history and wishes continuing success to the club and to junior football generally in Scotland.

Supported by: Fiona Hyslop, Tommy Sheridan, Allan Wilson, Bristow Muldoon, Mr Michael McMahon, Mr Brian Monteith, Mr John McAllion, Karen Whitefield, Pauline McNeill

S1M-915 Mr Gil Paterson: Glasgow Rape Crisis Centre: Judicial Review in Respect of Mike Tyson—That the Parliament congratulates the Rape Crisis Centre in Glasgow on its announcement that it is to seek a judicial review of Jack Straw’s decision to make an exception to immigration law and allow Mike Tyson, a convicted rapist, to enter the UK and wishes it every success in this venture.

Supported by: Mr John Swinney, Irene McGugan, Colin Campbell, Alex Neil, Linda Fabiani, Shona Robison, Andrew Wilson, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Fiona McLeod, Ms Sandra White, Tricia Marwick

S1M-912 Mr Gil Paterson: Towards a Just Conclusion—That the Parliament recognises the humiliation caused to rape victims and victims of other sexual crimes when alleged assailants are allowed to conduct their own defence during trials and therefore cross-examine victims; notes with dismay that, according to recent speculation, the Scottish Executive’s response to the report Towards a Just Conclusion will fail to address this issue, and urges the Executive to reconsider its decision and ensure that victims of such crimes in Scotland will be entitled to the same protection as those in England and Wales.

Supported by: Donald Gorrie, Andrew Wilson, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Tommy Sheridan, Michael Matheson, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Alex Neil, Trish Godman, Colin Campbell, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Fergus Ewing, Nora Radcliffe, Tricia Marwick, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Andrew Welsh, Robin Harper, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Fiona McLeod, Fiona Hyslop, Nicola Sturgeon, Ms Sandra White, Bruce Crawford

S1M-911# Ms Margo MacDonald: Future Strategy for HIV and AIDS Management—That the Parliament requests the Scottish Executive to publicise, as a matter of some urgency, its strategy for the management of HIV and AIDS, given the rising numbers of heterosexual people contracting the HIV infection and the longer life expectancy of people living with HIV and AIDS due to advances in combination therapy treatment.

Supported by: Fiona Hyslop, Mr Kenny MacAskill, David Mundell, Donald Gorrie, Andrew Wilson, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Nora Radcliffe, Tommy Sheridan, Michael Matheson, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Alex Neil, Christine Grahame, David McLetchie, Colin Campbell, Scott Barrie, Mr Adam Ingram, Shona Robison, Brian Adam, Elaine Smith, Mr Murray Tosh, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Mr John McAllion, Tricia Marwick, Mr Gil Paterson, Margaret Jamieson, Robin Harper, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Fiona McLeod, Michael Russell, Mike Watson, Trish Godman, Cathy Peattie, Nick Johnston, Richard Lochhead, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh, Mr David Davidson, Ms Sandra White, Mary Scanlon

S1M-910 Donald Gorrie: Social Exclusion Research—That the Parliament notes research of the Social Exclusion Unit (PAT 14) and other bodies confirming that a lack of access to short-term credit and other financial services creates serious problems for many low income households, who face extortionate interest rates; urges the Scottish Executive to develop further its joined up approach to economic citizenship including better access to social fund grants, improved regulation of consumer credit lending, better resourcing of credit unions and pressing banks to provide a more socially responsible service, and calls for a public debate on the issue.

Supported by: Shona Robison, Tommy Sheridan, Fiona Hyslop, Linda Fabiani, Andrew Wilson, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Nora Radcliffe, Michael Matheson, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Alex Neil, Mr Michael McMahon, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Mr John McAllion, Tricia Marwick, Mr Gil Paterson, Alasdair Morgan, Robin Harper, Ms Sandra White

S1M-909 Donald Gorrie: Post Office Pension Fund—That the Parliament notes that the Post Office has responded to a surplus in its pension fund by giving itself a contributions holiday for the past 13 years instead of using the windfall to improve the position of its pensioners; regrets that the corporation should follow worst industry practice in this respect, and urges Post Office pension fund trustees to review their policy.

Supported by: Michael Russell, Nora Radcliffe, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Alex Neil, Christine Grahame, Linda Fabiani, Fergus Ewing, Andrew Wilson, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Mr John McAllion, Alasdair Morgan, Robin Harper, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Fiona McLeod, Cathy Peattie, Fiona Hyslop, Brian Adam, Michael Matheson, Ms Sandra White

S1M-907 Mr Jamie Stone: East Sutherland Economy—That the Parliament notes with concern the current and long-term problems faced in the local economy of Sutherland and asks the Scottish Executive to bring forward proposals for a multi-agency forum which could target resources, discuss possible solutions to these problems and prepare a report with recommendations at the earliest opportunity for consideration by the Parliament, the Scottish Executive and the Highlands and Islands Convention.

Supported by: David Mundell, Donald Gorrie, Mr Jamie McGrigor, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Robin Harper, Rhoda Grant, Maureen Macmillan, Mary Scanlon

S1M-903# Irene Oldfather: Carrick - City of Adelaide—That the Parliament notes the proposed demolition of the Carrick – City of Adelaide, the world’s oldest clipper ship and the only vessel in Scotland to be an "A" listed structure; regrets that such an important part of Scotland, Sunderland and South Australia’s national and international maritime heritage should be in such a position, and believes that every effort should be made to secure a future for the vessel.

Supported by: Mr Brian Monteith, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Michael Russell, Mr Jamie Stone, Allan Wilson, David Mundell, Donald Gorrie, Ms Sandra White, Andrew Wilson, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Nora Radcliffe, Rhoda Grant, Alex Neil, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Fergus Ewing, Kay Ullrich, Mr Murray Tosh, Mr John McAllion, Mr Gil Paterson, Margaret Jamieson, Phil Gallie, Dr Elaine Murray, Nick Johnston, Mr Keith Harding, Tricia Marwick, Karen Whitefield, Mr Jamie McGrigor, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh, Irene McGugan, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mrs Margaret Ewing, David McLetchie, John Scott, Mike Watson, Mr Kenneth Macintosh, Hugh Henry, Ms Margo MacDonald, Cathy Peattie

S1M-902 Robin Harper: Accidental Release of GM Oil Seed Rape—That the Parliament invites the Scottish Executive, as a matter of urgency, to guarantee full compensation for farmers who have accidentally planted the genetically modified oil seed rape from Advanta Seeds, thus allowing them to immediately destroy these crops in order to limit the spread of GM pollen and seeds into the countryside. R

Supported by: Michael Russell, Andrew Wilson, Alex Neil, Christine Grahame, Alex Fergusson, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Mr John McAllion, Ms Sandra White, Mr John Munro

S1M-901# Maureen Macmillan: Closure of Kinlochleven Aluminium Smelter—That the Parliament notes with concern the announcement that Kinlochleven Aluminium Smelter is to close on June 15, after almost 100 years of providing work in the area, with the loss of 51 jobs, and urges the Scottish Executive to work with relevant groups to ensure that all support is given to the workers and people of Kinlochleven.

Supported by: Scott Barrie, Dr Elaine Murray, Cathy Jamieson, Helen Eadie, Hugh Henry, Rhoda Grant, Mr Michael McMahon, Malcolm Chisholm, Irene Oldfather, Mr Jamie McGrigor, Elaine Smith, Elaine Thomson, Margaret Jamieson, Mr Jamie Stone, Karen Whitefield

S1M-900# Dorothy-Grace Elder: Lottery Funds for Glasgow Zoo and other Tourist Attractions—That the Parliament urges the Scottish Executive to make representations to the Millennium Commission to immediately provide funding to save Glasgow Zoo from closure; further invites it to assist other major Scottish tourist attractions, including the paddle steamer, Waverley; believes that such attractions are highly deserving of aid in comparison with the unsuccessful Millennium Dome in London, and expresses dissatisfaction at the additional £29 million of funding given by the Millennium Commission to the Millennium Dome, which has already received £509 million in lottery funding.

Supported by: Donald Gorrie, Alex Neil, Shona Robison, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Fiona McLeod, Tricia Marwick

S1M-899 Fergus Ewing: Millennium Dome Bail Out—That the Parliament notes yesterday’s announcement that £29 million in lottery money is to be given to support the beleaguered Millennium Dome; expresses its grave disapproval that more money is to be spent on this misguided and ill-fated endeavour, and questions the priorities of Her Majesty’s Government for choosing to spend this money on a failed visitor attraction when this same bail-out money could be used either to build 580 new council houses, to increase the Highlands education capital budget by three and a half times, or fund all of the NHS accident and emergency modernisation projects which had to be turned down due to lack of funds.

Supported by: Mr Kenneth Gibson, Shona Robison, Donald Gorrie, Linda Fabiani, Andrew Wilson, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Michael Matheson, Alex Neil, Christine Grahame, Colin Campbell, Roseanna Cunningham, Brian Adam, Alasdair Morgan, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Fiona McLeod, Ms Sandra White, Tricia Marwick, Margaret Smith

S1M-898# Christine Grahame: Scottish Tomato Industry—That the Parliament notes the crisis in the Scottish tomato industry due to the failure of leading Scottish supermarkets to stock its produce; recognises that Scottish produce is renowned for its high quality; further recognises that the fresh produce industry supports thousands of Scottish jobs, and recommends to Scotland’s major food retailers that Scottish produce be promoted in their stores.

Supported by: Michael Russell, Mr Brian Monteith, Dr Elaine Murray, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Shona Robison, David Mundell, Donald Gorrie, Fiona Hyslop, Ms Sandra White, Andrew Wilson, Nora Radcliffe, Mr John Swinney, Alex Neil, Irene McGugan, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Linda Fabiani, Fergus Ewing, Mr Keith Harding, Mr Jamie McGrigor, Brian Adam, Mr Murray Tosh, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Mr John McAllion, Tricia Marwick, Mr Gil Paterson, Alasdair Morgan, Phil Gallie, Robin Harper, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Fiona McLeod, Cathy Jamieson, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh, Mr David Davidson, Mary Scanlon

S1M-897 Dorothy-Grace Elder: Baby Care Unit at Queen Mother Hospital, Glasgow—That the Parliament sends warm congratulations to Glasgow’s Lady Provost, Mrs Mosson, on the success of her first Lady Provost’s fundraiser on Sunday 21 May 2000 for the under-equipped Special Care Baby Unit at the Queen Mother’s Hospital, Glasgow; pays tribute to the innovative work of her predecessor, Mrs Lally, and acknowledges the debt Glasgow owes to the caring voluntary efforts of successive Ladies Provost and Lords Provost.

Supported by: Andrew Wilson, Alex Neil, Tricia Marwick

S1M-895# Christine Grahame: Expansion of Signum Circuits—That the Parliament commends the management and the workforce of the electronics firm of Signum Circuits of Selkirk in the Scottish Borders on its expansion; recognises the contribution that Signum Circuits is making to the Borders economy; notes that Signum Circuits has succeeded despite the strong pound and high interest rates; further notes that the firm has additionally employed over 100 people in the last 18 months, many of them former Viasystems workers, and recognises that the closure of Viasystems with the loss of 1,000 Borders’ jobs was not as a consequence of global pressures on its production there, but in the interests of complying with the conditions attached to their £25 million Regional Selective Assistance which was to create 1,000 jobs at the North Tyneside plant.

Supported by: Dorothy-Grace Elder, Michael Russell, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Fiona Hyslop, Alex Neil, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Fergus Ewing, Tricia Marwick, Mr Gil Paterson, Dr Winnie Ewing, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Ms Sandra White

S1M-892# Pauline McNeill: Saltmarket Centenary—That the Parliament notes that the Saltmarket area in Glasgow Kelvin will celebrate its 100th birthday in 2002; further notes that the Glasgow Cross Tenants and Residents Association are planning activities for the centenary, and expresses its commitment to regenerating inner city areas such as Saltmarket to ensure a quality life for local people so that ordinary people continue to live in city centres and not just shop there.

Supported by: Tommy Sheridan, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Michael Russell, Ms Sandra White, Andrew Wilson, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Rhoda Grant, Michael Matheson, Alex Neil, Mr Michael McMahon, Irene Oldfather, Fergus Ewing, Mr John McAllion, Mike Watson, Trish Godman

S1M-891# Dorothy-Grace Elder: Projected Costings for the Parliament Remaining in Glasgow until 2003—That the Parliament expresses its deep appreciation of the welcome it has received and the facilities it has been afforded in Glasgow invites the Presiding Officer to launch an immediate investigation into the cost of the Parliament remaining in Glasgow until the Holyrood building is finished in the year 2003, and further invites him to produce a comparison of these costings with the projected cost of remaining at the Mound and moving each May.

Supported by: Tommy Sheridan, Ms Sandra White

S1M-886 Irene Oldfather: Stevenston Millennium Festival—That the Parliament notes the Stevenston Millennium Festival and its varied and extensive programme of events; commends the Stevenston Millennium Committee for its work in organising the Festival and involving the whole community in the millennium celebrations, and wishes the Festival every success over the coming months.

Supported by: Michael Russell, David Mundell, Andrew Wilson, Mr Michael McMahon, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Murray Tosh, Mr Gil Paterson, Phil Gallie, Alex Neil, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh

S1M-885# Tricia Marwick: Car Parking Charges in Fife Hospitals—That the Parliament deplores the proposals by Fife Acute Hospitals NHS Trust to introduce car parking charges at the Victoria, Queen Margaret and Forth Park hospitals; recognises the widespread public anger at this additional burden on sick people, their relatives and staff; congratulates the Dunfermline Press and the Fife Free Press group of newspapers which have to date collected 20,000 signatures on their petitions opposing the charges, and believes that the Trust should abandon these proposals and take positive action to restore the confidence of the Fife public.

Supported by: Shona Robison, Tommy Sheridan, Mr Brian Monteith, Michael Russell, Scott Barrie, Donald Gorrie, Fiona Hyslop, Linda Fabiani, Andrew Wilson, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Mr Michael McMahon, Marilyn Livingstone, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Fergus Ewing, Mr Keith Harding, Kay Ullrich, Tricia Marwick, Mr Gil Paterson, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Fiona McLeod, Nick Johnston, Alex Neil, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh, Ms Sandra White, Brian Adam

S1M-808# Fergus Ewing: Shinty—That the Parliament recognises the importance of shinty as Scotland’s indigenous sport; notes that, whilst it is especially popular in the Highlands, it is played throughout Scotland; acknowledges that it makes a significant contribution to Scotland in terms of social inclusion, citizenship, healthy living, community development, volunteering and economic development; welcomes the comprehensive presentation made by the Camanachd Association to MSPs on 3 May 2000, and supports the Association’s case for enhanced funding from sportscotland.

Supported by: Mr Duncan Hamilton, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Colin Campbell, Michael Russell, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Shona Robison, Nora Radcliffe, Donald Gorrie, Alex Neil, Richard Lochhead, Mr John McAllion, Andrew Wilson, Mary Scanlon, Mr Adam Ingram, Linda Fabiani, Cathy Peattie, Irene McGugan, Fiona McLeod, Mr David Davidson, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Tricia Marwick, Mr Gil Paterson, Dr Winnie Ewing, Maureen Macmillan, Mr Kenneth Gibson

S1M-761# Ms Sandra White: Sign Language in Primary Schools —That the Parliament congratulates St Brendon’s primary school in Glasgow on its participation in the Millennium Schools project, which taught the basics of British Sign Language (BSL) and deaf awareness, and invites the Scottish Executive to investigate the introduction of BSL to the school curriculum.

Supported by: Mr Kenneth Gibson, Fergus Ewing, Bruce Crawford, Kay Ullrich, Fiona McLeod, Fiona Hyslop, Alex Neil, Alasdair Morgan, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Colin Campbell, Mr Adam Ingram, Irene McGugan, Nora Radcliffe, Tricia Marwick, Mr Gil Paterson, Andrew Wilson, Donald Gorrie, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Christine Grahame, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh, Mr Keith Harding, Shona Robison, Robin Harper, Dr Winnie Ewing, Mr Andrew Welsh, Roseanna Cunningham, Ms Margo MacDonald, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Michael Russell, Mr John Swinney, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Tommy Sheridan, Mr John McAllion, Nicola Sturgeon, Linda Fabiani, Michael Matheson, Brian Adam, Mr Brian Monteith, Mary Scanlon, Bill Aitken

S1M-617 Linda Fabiani: Health Provision in Scotland—That the Parliament notes that the World Trade Organisation negotiations on liberalising government services, now ongoing, will be binding on the Scottish Parliament and will establish limits on future health policies set by the Parliament, and calls for an open discussion of the implications of these negotiations for the Scottish Executive’s health policies and current and future health service funding.

Supported by: Roseanna Cunningham, Michael Russell, Nicola Sturgeon, Mike Watson, Mr Kenneth Gibson, Shona Robison, Christine Grahame, Andrew Wilson, Robin Harper, Margaret Jamieson, Pauline McNeill, Cathy Peattie, Kay Ullrich, Tommy Sheridan, Mr Duncan Hamilton, Tavish Scott, Fergus Ewing, Alex Neil, Donald Gorrie, Brian Adam, Nora Radcliffe, Ian Jenkins, Mr Adam Ingram, Tricia Marwick, Dr Richard Simpson, Mr Gil Paterson, Robert Brown, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Cathy Jamieson, Johann Lamont, Malcolm Chisholm, Mr John Swinney, Fiona McLeod, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Elaine Smith, Mr Lloyd Quinan, Dr Winnie Ewing, Irene McGugan, Dennis Canavan, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Ms Margo MacDonald, Michael Matheson, Bruce Crawford, Colin Campbell, Dr Sylvia Jackson, Mr Andrew Welsh, Ms Sandra White, Alasdair Morgan, George Lyon, Richard Lochhead, Mr Jamie Stone, Mr Mike Rumbles, Mr John McAllion



BUSINESS BULLETIN 162 / 2000

Monday 30 October 2000

Section H - New Documents




Committee Reports

The following Report is being published on 30 October 2000

Health and Community Care Committee, 14th Report 2000: Report on Subordinate Legislation (SP Paper 202)



European Documents

Members wishing to see a list of European documents received in the Parliament should contact the clerks to the European Committee (stephen.imrie@scottish.parliament.uk). Members are reminded that a complete set of all documents received is held by SPICe in G15, PHQ and copies can be made available on request.



BUSINESS BULLETIN 162 / 2000

Monday 30 October 2000

Section J - Progress of Parliamentary business




For further information on the progress of Bills, subordinate legislation and committees shown in this section, please contact either the relevant clerk or web site (end of Section for addresses)

Bills in Progress

Abolition of Poindings and Warrant Sales Bill

Stage 2 completed 19 September

Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) Bill

Introduced 5 October

Family Homes and Homelessness (Scotland) Bill

Stage 1 (evidence, Social Inclusion, Housing and

Voluntary Sector Committee) 1 November

Leasehold Casualties (Scotland) Bill

Stage 1 (Justice and Home Affairs Committee) 8 November

Mortgage Rights (Scotland) Bill

Stage 1 (evidence Social Inclusion, Housing and

Voluntary Sector Committee) 1 November

Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill

Stage 1 (evidence, Rural Affairs Committee) 14 November

Salmon Conservation (Scotland) Bill

Stage 1 (evidence, Rural Affairs Committee) 31 October

Sea Fisheries (Shellfish) Amendment (Scotland) Bill

Bill Passed 28 September

Transport (Scotland) Bill

Stage 2 (Day 3, Transport and the Environment Committee) 1 November



Subordinate legislation in progress

(date of laying) (Lead Committee)

Affirmative Instruments

For approval by resolution

The draft Train Operating Companies (Rateable Values) (Scotland) (No.2) Order 2000 (21 September 2000) (Local Government)

The Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Notification of Authorisations etc.) (Scotland) Order 2000 (SSI 2000/340) (29 September 2000) (Justice and Home Affairs)

The Food Protection (Emergency Prohibitions) (Amnesic Shellfish Poisoning) (West Coast) (No.4) (Scotland) Order 2000 (SSI 2000/359) (12 October 2000)

The Food Protection (Emergency Prohibitions) (Amnesic Shellfish Poisoning) (East Coast) (Scotland) Order 2000 (SSI 2000/360) (16 October 2000)

The Food Protection (Emergency Prohibitions) (Amnesic Shellfish Poisoning) (East Coast) (No. 2) (Scotland) Order 2000 (SSI 2000/370) (20 October 2000)

The draft Welfare of Farmed Animals (Scotland) Regulations 2000 (23 October 2000)

The draft Budget (Scotland) Act 2000 (Amendment) (No.2) Order 2000 (24 October 2000)


Negative Instruments


Subject to annulment until 30 October 2000

The General Medical Council (Legal Assessors) Amendment (Scotland) Rules 2000 (SSI 2000/308) (7 September 2000) (Health and Community Care)


Subject to annulment until 31 October 2000

The Food Irradiation Provisions (Scotland) Regulations 2000 (SSI 2000/309) (8 September 2000) (Health and Community Care)


Subject to annulment until 6 November 2000

The Electricity Works (Environmental Impact Assessment) (Scotland) Regulations 2000 (SSI 2000/320) (14 September 2000) (Transport and the Environment)


Subject to annulment until 17 November 2000

The Diseases of Fish (Control) Amendment (Scotland) Regulations 2000 (SSI 2000/330) (25 September 2000) (Rural Affairs)


Subject to annulment until 21 November 2000


The Education and Training (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2000 (SSI 2000/342) (29 September 2000) (Enterprise and Lifelong Learning)

The Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Prescription of Offices, Ranks and Positions) (Scotland) Order 2000 (SSI 2000/343) (29 September 2000) (Justice and Home Affairs)

The Specified Risk Material Order Amendment (Scotland) Regulations 2000 (SSI 2000/344) (29 September 2000) (Health and Community Care)

The Specified Risk Material Amendment (Scotland) Regulations 2000 (SSI 2000/345) (29 September 2000) (Health and Community Care)

Subject to annulment until 25 November 2000


The Agricultural Subsidies (Appeals) (Scotland) Regulations 2000 (SSI 2000/347) (3 October 2000) (Rural Affairs)


Subject to annulment until 28 November 2000


The National Health Service (General Dental Services) (Scotland) Amendment (No.2) Regulations 2000 (SSI 2000/352) (6 October 2000)


Subject to annulment until 1 December 2000


The Brucellosis (Scotland) Regulations 2000 (SSI 2000/364) (18 October 2000)

The Enzootic Bovine Leukosis (Scotland) Regulations 2000 (SSI 2000/365) (18 October 2000)

The Teachers’ Superannuation (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2000 (SSI 2000/366) (18 October 2000)

The Gaming Clubs (Hours) (Scotland) Regulations 2000 (SSI 2000/371) (23 October 2000)




Committee Business

Dates indicate when the next meeting is due to take place on the relevant subject.

Audit 14 November

Education, Culture and Sport See Section A

Enterprise and Lifelong Learning 1 November

Equal Opportunities 7 November

European 31 October

Finance 31 October

Health and Community Care 1 November

Justice and Home Affairs 31 October

Local Government 31 October

Procedures 7 November

Public Petitions 7 November

Rural Affairs 31 October

Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector 1 November

Standards 21 November

Subordinate Legislation 31 October

Transport and Environment 1 November



[CENSORED: table inserted here in original giving contact information]

Session 1 (2001)

Scottish Parliament
Official Report

Volume

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

CONTENTS

Wednesday 26 September 2001

Debates

TIME FOR REFLECTION
MOTION WITHOUT NOTICE
Motion moved—[Euan Robson]—and agreed to.
BUSINESS MOTION
Motion moved—[Euan Robson]—and agreed to.
CARE OF THE ELDERLY
Statement—[Susan Deacon].
The Minister for Health and Community Care (Susan Deacon)
VOLUNTARY SECTOR
Motion moved—[Jackie Baillie].
Amendment moved—[Mr Kenneth Gibson].
Amendment moved—[Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh].
The Minister for Social Justice (Jackie Baillie)
Mr Kenneth Gibson (Glasgow) (SNP)
Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh (Central Scotland) (Con)
Robert Brown (Glasgow) (LD)
Karen Whitefield (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab)
Mr George Reid (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Mr David Davidson (North-East Scotland) (Con)
George Lyon (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
Tricia Marwick (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Miss Annabel Goldie (West of Scotland) (Con)
Robin Harper (Lothians) (Green)
Stewart Stevenson (Banff and Buchan) (SNP)
Cathy Peattie (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Alex Neil (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Mr Mike Rumbles (West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine) (LD)
Bill Aitken (Glasgow) (Con)
Linda Fabiani (Central Scotland) (SNP)
The Deputy Minister for Social Justice (Ms Margaret Curran)
SCOTTISH PARLIAMENTARY AND HEALTH SERVICE OMBUDSMAN ANNUAL REPORT
Motion moved—[Mrs Margaret Smith].
PARLIAMENTARY BUREAU MOTION
Motion moved—[Euan Robson].
DECISION TIME
EUROPEAN DAY OF LANGUAGES
Motion debated—[Irene Oldfather].
Irene Oldfather (Cunninghame South) (Lab)
Mr George Reid (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Mr Jamie McGrigor (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Ian Jenkins (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD)
Dr Richard Simpson (Ochil) (Lab)
Dr Winnie Ewing (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Maureen Macmillan (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Mr Lloyd Quinan (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Karen Gillon (Clydesdale) (Lab)
Colin Campbell (West of Scotland) (SNP)
The Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs (Mr Jack McConnell)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Scottish Parliament

Wednesday 26 September 2001

(Afternoon)

[THE PRESIDING OFFICER opened the meeting at 14:30]

Time for Reflection

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): To lead our time for reflection today, we welcome Mr Ephraim Borowski, who is the honorary secretary of the Scottish Council of Jewish Communities.

Mr Ephraim Borowski (Scottish Council of Jewish Communities): Thank you, Sir David.

It is an immense privilege to be invited to lead time for reflection, and all the more to be the first lay member of the Jewish community to do so. It is a privilege that would have been unimaginable to my parents—my late father was a refugee from the Holocaust, and my late mother's family were refugees from tsarist pogroms. In contrast, the fact that I stand here today is evidence of the rich mix of threads in the tartan of Scottish society—threads of faith, ethnicity, language, origin, history and geography—so that each of us is at the junction of so many intersecting minorities. Just as the strongest rope is made up of myriad overlapping fragile strands, we do well to remind ourselves that the strength of any society lies not in its homogeneity, but in its common purpose.

It is that consensus that the atrocity that engulfed Manhattan both shattered and—paradoxically—reinforced. When I was in the chamber only three days later to mark the jubilee of the Race Relations Act 1976, I remarked on the continuity of hatred—from racial discrimination, through murder and terrorism and ultimately to genocide. All depend on the objectification and demonisation of the other, which could be a whole nation or a whole people. Those who now blame the Arabs or the Muslims are no different from those who demonise the Americans or the Jews. To strive effectively against that mindset, we must realise how instinctive it is. As our sage Maimonides teaches, the first step to repentance is to recognise our faults; only then can we overcome them.

Last week, the Jewish world entered our 5762nd new year—a time for sober reflection on the year behind and fervent prayer for the year ahead. Tradition regards the new year as the birthday of the world. If the creation narrative of Genesis teaches us anything, it is that we are, all of us, whatever our colour, culture, or creed, made in the image of God. Remarkably, the Hebrew word translated here as God is used elsewhere to refer to a human judge. It is our capacity for judgment that is in the image of God—our capacity to distinguish right from wrong and our capacity to make moral choices, together with the obligation to create institutions that uphold and respect the rule of law.

As we reach the end of our annual circuit of the Torah, the Hebrew Bible, we read Moses's final address to the Jewish people as they prepare to enter the promised land:

"See, I have placed before you today life and good, and death and evil ... And you shall choose life."

To be able to choose good, the possibility of evil must exist. That freedom to choose is perhaps, as the existentialists taught, the curse of the human condition, for the price of that choice may be a rain of terror upon Manhattan. If the price of freedom is eternal vigilance, it is vigilance against the unimaginable consequences of other people's choices.

Truly, we saw on that terrible, terror-filled day, the consequences

"if your heart strays, and you ... worship false gods";

not, that is, the worship of our one God by a different name, or in a different edifice, or with a different ritual, but the elevation of some human goal above God himself and above the common humanity symbolised by our common ancestry in Adam and Eve.

We are reminded, in the words of one of the most moving prayers that we will recite tomorrow on Yom Kippur, that humanity—in every sense of that word—is merely

"like withering grass, like a fading flower, like a flitting shadow, like a passing cloud ... and like a fleeting dream."

So long as the human capacity for evil survives, it falls to you, members of the newest democratic Parliament in the world, to choose life—to shape a society that is based upon the principles of equal worth, mutual respect and the rule of law, and in which all may live in understanding, peace, and harmony.

To adapt another figure from our liturgy, which is appropriate to this momentous time: may the old year end along with its curses, and may a new year of blessings begin.

Motion without Notice

14:35

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): I am minded to accept a motion without notice from Euan Robson to change business this afternoon.

The Deputy Minister for Parliament (Euan Robson): I move motion S1M-2251.

The Presiding Officer: At the moment you are just moving to introduce a motion without notice. I have a request from Fiona Hyslop to speak on the matter.

Fiona Hyslop (Lothians) (SNP): This is the second time that a Minister for Parliament has been forced to come to Parliament to move a motion without notice to provide for a ministerial statement on care development. Indeed, the first time that such a move was required was to establish the care development group. The SNP has been right to demand that the Parliament should have the opportunity to hear the results of that group's inquiry and the response from the Executive.

The SNP has offered its time on Thursday for the issue. We do not know what is in the statement—we will have to hear it—but if it is not satisfactory to the Parliament, we will have the opportunity, because of the provision made by the SNP in its own time, to debate this important issue and vote on it. We welcome the opportunity of a ministerial statement—a move that has been forced by the SNP—and we look forward to hearing that statement and having a debate tomorrow.

The Presiding Officer: Is it agreed that a motion without notice be moved?

Members indicated agreement.

Motion moved,

That motion S1M-2251 be taken at this meeting of the Parliament.—[Euan Robson.]

Motion agreed to.

Ms Margo MacDonald (Lothians) (SNP): On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Would you be minded to accept a motion without notice from me, so that the Parliament can attempt to bridge the democratic deficit that has been left by the Westminster Government's refusal to scrutinise and discuss the great matters that are in front of us, with troops being committed to adventures that many of us know nothing about, and about which we want to know much more?

The Presiding Officer: I am afraid that my answer is no, I am not minded to accept a motion without notice on that subject.

Business Motion

14:36

Motion moved,

That the Parliament agrees as a revision to the Business Motion agreed on 20 September 2001—

Wednesday 26 September 2001

after "Time for Reflection", insert

followed by Ministerial statement on the Scottish Executive's Response to the Report of the Care Development Group—[Euan Robson.]

Motion agreed to.

Care of the Elderly

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): The next item of business is a statement by Susan Deacon, on the Scottish Executive's response to the report of the care development group.

14:37

The Minister for Health and Community Care (Susan Deacon): I welcome this opportunity to set out to Parliament the Scottish Executive's response to the care development group's report and recommendations. As members will recall, I announced the setting up of the care development group in January, to undertake an examination of long-term care provision for Scotland's older people. We asked the group to produce recommendations to ensure that high-quality and sustainable services could be provided now and in the future, and we asked it to produce proposals, together with costs and implications, for the implementation of free personal care for Scotland's older people.

We should not underestimate the scale and complexity of that remit. Today, I and my ministerial colleagues wish to place on record our appreciation to members of the group for the substantial personal and professional commitment that they have given to the group's work over the past seven months. I pay particular tribute to Malcolm Chisholm for driving the work forward.

I can confirm to Parliament today that the Scottish Executive has agreed to accept all the group's recommendations, and that we are committed now to implementing them. In doing so, we are honouring our pledge to the people of Scotland to provide better, fairer care for our older people, now and in the future. From April 2002, free nursing and personal care will be provided for all Scotland's older people. From that date also, substantial additional investment will be provided for care services for older people.

As an Executive, we have made clear consistently our determination to ensure that the people of Scotland are provided with dignity, security and support in their old age. We have consistently backed that commitment with action, investment and, where necessary, legislation. The implementation of the care development group's recommendations represents a significant milestone in the fulfilment of our commitment. In addition, yesterday we published the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill, which is another crucial step forward in providing the necessary statutory underpinning of our work to improve care services and providing universal free nursing and personal care from April 2002.

The care development group's report stretches to 101 pages and contains 39 recommendations. I will highlight some of the main points in the report.

The group welcomed and endorsed the policy of providing free personal care. It endorsed the existing policy that the balance of care should continue to be shifted towards enabling people to stay in their own homes. It also stipulated that investment in and improvement of care services must accompany the introduction of free personal care to accommodate unmet need and increased demand.

The group made specific recommendations about the definition of personal care and the assessment of care. It adopted a definition of personal care that is in line with that which was recommended by the royal commission chaired by Sir Stewart Sutherland. The group also endorsed the royal commission's view that people should continue to pay for their accommodation and living costs. It recommended the removal of all charges for personal care in the community.

For those who are in a care home and are currently self-funding, the group recommended a flat-rate payment of £90 a week for personal care and a further £65 for those who are assessed as needing nursing care. Those sums reflect the current average costs for those in similar circumstances whose costs are currently paid from the public purse. The implementation of the measures will therefore benefit many thousands of people who currently pay for their care. Self-funders in care homes will see a reduction in their costs. Those living at home who currently pay towards their personal care costs will no longer be charged for those costs. Investment in services will build upon the £100 million that I announced last October. We will therefore see a further expansion in the care and support that is provided to older people across Scotland.

In accepting the recommendations of the care development group, we are not looking at free personal care in isolation. As the group's report makes clear, the provision of free personal care in itself will not solve some of the other issues that are facing the care sector, such as delayed discharge from hospital or the need for stability in the care homes sector. We are pleased that the care development group report strongly endorsed the work that is already under way to provide better services, more care at home, and better joint working between professionals and agencies. As the care development group has asked us to do, we commit to continuing that work.

The report highlights the good work that is going on throughout Scotland, and we want to build on that. However, it also identifies the gaps, deficiencies and duplication that still exist. Too many people are still not getting the care that they need when they need it or where they want it. That situation will not change overnight, but change is happening. I am pleased that the report identifies clear evidence that the actions and investment that the Executive put in place are bearing fruit. Rapid-response teams are providing quick, flexible support for people who fall ill and for whom a short period of help has avoided the need to go into hospital. Local authorities and the national health service are working together effectively to provide better, more responsive services and to deliver more care and support to people in their own homes. More long-term care is being provided at home for people who, for example, have suffered a stroke and might otherwise have had to go into residential care. More short-term help is being provided to support the recovery at home of people who come out of hospital—for example, after a hip replacement.

We applaud the efforts that are being made by local authorities, the NHS and the voluntary and independent sectors to improve the care of Scotland's older people. However, we believe that more needs to be done. We recognise that we have set a demanding agenda for local authorities in particular and that the introduction of free personal care from April next year is a further challenge.

The care development group recommended that an implementation group be established to take forward the report's recommendations. I am pleased to confirm that the Executive is acting on that recommendation and will bring together that group soon.

Delivering change on the required scale needs real partnership and teamwork. We will continue to work closely with the providers and the users of care to ensure that that change is achieved. However, change cannot be delivered successfully without proper resources being made available. That is why, last October, we committed substantial new investment to older people's services. We also made £25 million a year available for the introduction of free nursing care.

In July, the Minister for Finance and Local Government, Angus MacKay, set out how Executive budgets had been realigned to meet our priorities and to release a further £100 million next year and the year after to take forward the care development group's recommendations. By any measure, that is substantial additional investment. It is tangible evidence of the Executive's commitment to translating our promises into results.

We are aware, of course, that attention has focused in recent days on attendance allowance. I will set out clearly the position on that issue. As the care development group's report says, attendance allowance in care homes is a United Kingdom contribution towards personal care costs on which Scotland is choosing to build. Most of the 8,000 people who meet their care costs in nursing or residential care would be eligible for payment of attendance allowance at the rate of £55 per week, giving an annual amount of just under £23 million. In other words, the full free personal care entitlement would be £145 per week, made up of £55 UK entitlement plus £90 from the Executive. In addition, we are making available free nursing care of up to £65 per week.

The group said that it would be odd and contrary to equity if entitlement to attendance allowance stopped for those in care homes because of a policy of free personal care in Scotland. Put simply, the group's view is that the money is in the system. It is meant for personal care and should continue to be used for that purpose.

The Executive is engaging in constructive dialogue on that issue with the Department for Work and Pensions. The situation is not constitutional turf war. We are, together, as responsible Government, managing the practicalities of the complex interrelationship between the UK benefits system and Scotland's care arrangements. The discussion concerns payments to individuals and who should make them. It may take time to resolve the issue, but as the First Minister said on Monday, whatever the outcome of those discussions, the provision of free personal care for Scotland's older people is a pledge that will be fulfilled.

Throughout the chamber, members have a genuine commitment to improving the lot of Scotland's older people, but I say more in sorrow than in anger that some have attempted to reduce the debate to simple slogans or political point scoring. The coalition Executive believes that Scotland's older people deserve better than that. That is why, at every turn, in every statement, in every investment and in every policy development, we have addressed the issues. We have set about making a difference.

The Executive has delivered record investment in services for older people in their homes; the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001 to improve standards of care; radical changes to improve the way in which local authorities and the NHS work together, making care of older people a new priority for the NHS; and, more widely, cheap travel and free central heating for Scotland's older people. Those are real actions and real investments to deliver real improvements to people's lives. By its actions, the Executive has shown that it is rising to the challenge that the people of Scotland have set it.

I thank the Parliament for the opportunity to make the statement. I am, of course, pleased to answer members' questions. I hope that today will be considered a further significant step forward for the betterment of the care of older people throughout Scotland.

The Presiding Officer: I invite those who would like to ask questions to press their request-to-speak buttons.

A debate is to be held on the issues tomorrow and I must protect the business that is scheduled for today, so I appeal for short questions and answers rather than long statements that could wait until tomorrow.

Nicola Sturgeon (Glasgow) (SNP): I pay tribute to the work of the care development group and warmly welcome today's statement from the minister. I am glad that, at last, the minister is now part of the consensus on this issue. I am sure that she will have noted that Westminster is watching.

The commitment to provide free personal care from next April is a victory for Scottish pensioners. Let us make no mistake, however, that it is also a victory for the independence and perseverance of the Scottish Parliament. Does the minister agree that the Parliament now has a duty to ensure that what has been promised is fully funded and deliverable?

The minister confirmed today that, without an agreement with Westminster on benefits payments, the Executive will require to find an additional £21.7 million. Will she now go further than simply stating the view of the care development group by making it clear that it is her view that the money that is currently paid by Westminster to Scottish pensioners in the form of attendance allowance—money that is derived from Scottish taxpayers—must, as a matter of principle, continue to be paid?

Does the minister agree that it would be a gross injustice if Westminster were to withdraw those benefits simply because Westminster does not agree with the policy of this Parliament? As the minister herself has said, that policy is designed to build on existing provision, not to replace it.

Finally, does the minister agree that her position in the on-going negotiations with Westminster will be strengthened if this Parliament agrees a motion tomorrow that makes it clear that we expect the Scottish Executive to win this battle?

Susan Deacon: Let me say sincerely that I am pleased that Nicola Sturgeon welcomes today's statement. I am genuinely pleased that she recognises that considerable work has been done to translate our promises into practice. I am bound to suggest to her that, if she is so welcoming of the progress that has been made, perhaps it is time for her to work constructively with that process. From the outset, the SNP has attempted to confuse the debate and to undermine the commitments that were given by the Executive. First, we heard that the definition would be watered down. Then, when it was clear that SNP members could not criticise the definition that would be adopted, they moved on to something else. Last week, Nicola Sturgeon claimed that we were making only £8 million available for free nursing care, when the real figure was in fact £25 million. The SNP realised—not for the first time in recent weeks—that its sums did not add up, so it then moved on to something else again. Now, the SNP is attempting to change the debate into a constitutional turf war.

We work in partnership with our UK colleagues for the betterment of the people whom we are elected to represent. I recognise that partnership is something that the SNP finds difficult to understand, but we are committed to it. We are determined to continue to build upon that partnership for the betterment of the care of older people throughout Scotland. That has been our promise; our commitment is clear for all to see.

Ben Wallace (North-East Scotland) (Con): I thank the minister for allowing her statement to be made available earlier so that we could read it in advance.

At this stage, the Scottish Conservatives welcome the implementation of the majority of the care group's recommendations on personal care. I have to say that it has been a long time coming. This time last year, the minister stood in the chamber and said that free personal care would be wrong, so I hope that she remembers her U-turn. We question whether the minister is now able to implement a commitment that she did not, in the first place, believe in, but will she consider going further by implementing Sir Stewart Sutherland's recommendation that all community care funds be pooled?

Will the minister assure us that whatever comes out of her negotiations with the Secretary of State for Work and Pensions will be done in the interest of the UK and will not produce a separate benefits system, which the nationalists would very much like to create? Will she ensure that, between her and the UK secretary of state, we get a solution?

Susan Deacon: Let me first be clear about what has been achieved in a short period of time. It is only a year since we first set out in detail a demanding programme of investment and action to improve services for older people and to deliver greater equity in charging for those care services. In that time, we have translated into action much of the joint working that needs to be put in place to achieve that. We have introduced legislation and the care development group has completed its work. We should all applaud the work that has been done and what has been achieved in seven months.

As I said in the chamber in January, if the Executive promises change and improvements for older people in Scotland, we will deliver change and improvements for older people in Scotland. We will say when we will do it and how we can do it, we will explain the consequences of making changes and we will ensure that we deliver those changes. What members have seen from us in the past year is work—month in, month out and year in, year out—to ensure that those changes are delivered. Our on-going discussion with the Department for Work and Pensions is one strand of that much wider tapestry.

It is interesting that both Opposition parties desire to try to translate that discussion into a constitutional issue. We do not see it as a constitutional issue; we see it as providing the best care that we can for the people of Scotland and having an effective dialogue and partnership with our colleagues in the UK. That practical and pragmatic approach underpins our work in this area, as in many others.

Mrs Margaret Smith (Edinburgh West) (LD): What we are seeing today is Liberal Democrat policy being put into practice by the coalition Executive. Free personal care has long been a Liberal Democrat policy. On behalf of my colleagues, I am delighted to welcome today's statement. I thank Malcolm Chisholm and the care development group for their work, which builds on the work of the joint future group and the Health and Community Care Committee. I pay tribute to my colleagues on that committee for their work on the issue.

We all welcome the constructive dialogue with Westminster—I am glad to see that the minister of state is here, listening to the views of the Scottish Parliament that are being expressed clearly today. It is also important that the Executive continues to have constructive dialogue with local government, because our local councils will have an incredible role to play in taking forward this agenda from now on. How will the Executive implement the single assessment process and joint working policies between local authorities and the health boards, which should improve services and decrease delayed discharge?

Will the minister guarantee that the changes regarding local authorities that are envisaged in the care development group report will be fully funded, so that there will be no shortfall in actual expenditure on older people's services and so that other council services will not suffer?

Susan Deacon: As I have said, the Executive's approach is underpinned by partnership. That includes the partnership between Labour and the Liberal Democrats and a productive partnership between national and local government. I am pleased to give Margaret Smith the assurance that she seeks that we will work closely with local authorities in implementing the changes.

As I said in my statement, we recognise that the programme of work will be demanding, but there are solid foundations to build upon. There are tremendous examples throughout Scotland of effective joint working. The effect of investment is starting to kick in. With the bill that was published yesterday, we are underpinning the move towards joint working, pooled budgets and practical changes that the Health and Community Care Committee has taken a keen interest in and has promoted over the past year. We have much to build on and we will continue to do that.

Dr Richard Simpson (Ochil) (Lab): I declare that I am the director of a nursing home company, albeit one that operates only in England.

I welcome the minister's statement. Will she indicate the numbers of long-stay NHS hospital beds in geriatrics, psychogeriatrics and learning disability that are still to close? In considering the care development group's recommendation for 100 per cent resource transfer of the funds realised by such closures from the NHS to the local authority community care budget, will the minister ensure that the community NHS medical and nursing services are funded to take over the health care?

Instead of ring-fencing the new money, will the minister consider requiring the local authority to publish its care of the elderly expenditure against grant-aided expenditure and resource transfer and consider, as part of a total settlement, making the local authority responsible for paying for nursing and personal care wherever the elderly person is situated, as that would remove the current perverse incentive? In Forth valley, that has led to the SNP-Conservative council in Falkirk increasing delayed discharges by unilaterally deciding not to take patients out of hospital because it saves the council money.

Susan Deacon: Richard Simpson's question serves to highlight how crucial and effective the working relationship between the NHS and local authorities is in ensuring that individuals receive genuinely responsive and seamless care that meets their needs. I will not repeat my earlier comments about the progress that has been made in that area. Long-stay NHS beds are touched on in the care development group's report, which recommends work that should flow from the group's consideration of the issue. We will be developing that work, and there are many areas in which we want to improve the data that are available, on the use of resources through the system and on the results that those resources deliver.

We are focused on results, and we want to strike a balance between monitoring and assessing how money is spent, in the NHS or by local authorities, and monitoring the results of that investment. The move towards outcome agreements between the Executive and local authorities on older people's care services signifies our determination to focus on results and improvement. It is a continuing debate, and I am sure that people in this Parliament and beyond will continue to consider how further improvements can be achieved.

Tommy Sheridan (Glasgow) (SSP): As a socialist, I accept 100 per cent the positive aspects of the report. Does the minister recognise that, if free personal care is part of the overall universal provision that makes up a clear socialist principle, she must be prepared, in her constructive dialogue with the Westminster Government, to argue that the other side of the universal provision bargain now has to be met, and that we need progressive taxation—with higher taxes on the higher earners—to make universal provision available?

Susan Deacon: The balance between universal provision and targeted benefits, or targeting in other areas, has been a matter of debate for a century or longer, and I am sure that it will continue to be so. Here in Scotland, within the powers available to us, we have exercised judgments about how and where to draw that line in other areas. I am pleased that my colleague, the Minister for Social Justice, is with us in the chamber this afternoon. In areas for which she is responsible, we have focused on targeting resources to those who are in greatest need. There is often no right or wrong and no black-and-white answer in such areas, but we will concentrate our efforts, our powers and our resources on striking an appropriate and fair balance for the people of Scotland.

Shona Robison (North-East Scotland) (SNP): I pay tribute to the work of the care development group, and to the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care, who seems to be ever the bridesmaid and never the bride at such big events.

The group's report sets the cost of free personal care at £145 per person per week. We know that the Executive has set aside £90 of that, and that there is continuing debate with Westminster about the remaining £55. Does Susan Deacon accept that not all people on attendance allowance receive the top rate of £55, and that some of them get the lower rate of £37? Even if Westminster agrees to allow people to retain attendance allowance, the Executive will still have an extra £18 to find for everyone on the lower rate. Has the minister calculated how many people are in that category, what the total additional bill will be and where the extra money will come from?

Susan Deacon: If there were time, I would take issue with one or two of the details of Shona Robison's question. However, the very nature of her question illustrates some of the complexities and technicalities that are involved. That is why we are not prepared to reduce the issue to simplistic terms. We want to hold constructive discussions with our colleagues in the Department for Work and Pensions to ensure that the arrangements that we put in place are effective and practical, and we will continue to do that.

Those members who know the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care will know that he can rarely be said to hide his light under a bushel, and nor, today, can the Executive.

Mr Keith Harding (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con): Will the minister reassure us that the press coverage suggesting that many elderly people in Scotland will, despite today's welcome announcement, be worse off than their counterparts in England is untrue?

Susan Deacon: We dismiss absolutely the claims that were made in the press report to which I think the member refers. If it is the same report, Malcolm Chisholm responded directly to it in the press. I therefore refer the member to Malcolm Chisholm's letter.

Robert Brown (Glasgow) (LD): I, too, welcome the minister's statement and the Executive's achievement in full of its pledges.

I will return to the questions that were asked by Margaret Smith and Richard Simpson about the effective use of money and previously announced money. Will the minister give an assurance that measures will be put in place to ensure that the money adds value to local authorities' spending on care? There is an impression among some care groups that money is not producing much additional resource. Will the minister keep a close eye on that? Will she ensure that local authorities deliver in the sector in question?

Susan Deacon: I am happy to give the member the assurance that he seeks.

Colin Campbell (West of Scotland) (SNP): I declare an approaching chronological interest.

The Executive's intention is that people receive £145 per week for personal care; however, £145 is the average cost of personal care and 40 per cent of people who currently fund their own residential care pay more than the average. Does the minister accept that the Executive plans amount only to subsidised personal care for those people?

Susan Deacon: The care development group has carefully considered those matters. I commend the report to members who have not yet read it, because the group has considered not only how much people should be paid towards the cost of care, but how that system can be as fair, transparent and equitable as possible.

As I said in reply to previous questions, there are no absolute right or wrong answers, but the Executive and the care development group have set out the issues more transparently than they have been set out on previous occasions.

Colin Campbell mentioned a chronological interest, but not only those in the chamber with slightly greyer hair have an interest. A key part of the care development group's remit was to come up with recommendations for sustainable services. Many members are part of the baby boomer generation and will have needs further down the track. The care development group's approach is balanced and meets needs for the care of older people now and in the future.

Voluntary Sector

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): The next item of business is a debate on motion S1M-2245, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on Executive support for the voluntary sector, and two amendments to the motion.

15:08

The Minister for Social Justice (Jackie Baillie): Parliament has not had a general debate on the voluntary sector for around two years. Things have moved on considerably since then and I want to update Parliament on the progress that we are making in our partnership with the sector.

The voluntary sector is vital to Scottish life and is a major player in all aspects of Scottish society and the Scottish economy as well as at a local, community level. The voluntary sector's potential comes from its distinct characteristics and values. It engages individuals in the life of communities and is close and sensitive to marginalised groups and areas. The sector's services are invariably delivered at a local level, at the sharp end of society's problems. The sector has a key role in helping to develop policies that work.

We believe that the sector can help us to achieve a much more inclusive and just society. The sector can provide sustainable jobs and services and build the capacity of people and communities. It is also a particularly important resource for those who face difficulties in respect of access or limited choice. We also believe that the involvement of civic society in shaping policies for Scotland is one of the opportunities that the Scottish Parliament has brought and that we should capitalise on that.

I want to remind members of the scope of the sector. There are 44,000 voluntary organisations in Scotland, which employ around 100,000 people. The sector enjoys income of more than £2 billion a year, which is around 4 per cent of our gross domestic product, and that income is growing. As well as having a large number of thriving voluntary organisations, Scotland enjoys the benefits of a long tradition of volunteering. Around 27 per cent of adults regularly take part in voluntary activity.

The outlook is positive. I see a sector that is improving in shape and is delivering more for the increased resources that have been invested in it, but that is capable of delivering more. The Executive wants the voluntary sector to bring its strength, sensitivity and responsiveness to local needs to the strategy to achieve social justice for Scotland.

Given that vision, what policies have we put in place to assist the sector in its development? We have committed to providing the legal, financial and structural framework that will enable the sector to reach its full potential in the contribution that it can make to Scotland. For the first time, a Scotland-wide network of councils for voluntary service and local volunteering development agencies provides support to volunteers and voluntary organisations in local communities. We have increased our funding to the sector, we are reviewing how we deliver that funding and we have introduced new financial vehicles such as social investment Scotland. I will say more about that and our review of charity law a little later.

The starting point in our partnership with the sector is the Scottish compact, which is the formal agreement between the Executive and the voluntary sector on working in partnership. The compact underpins and strengthens our relationship. Crucially, it gives the voluntary sector a place at the policy development table, which ultimately will make our policies much more responsive. The compact recognises the independence of the sector. I will always protect the sector's right to be critical of Government. If the sector was not independent, it would lose one of its greatest strengths.

The Executive and the voluntary sector are monitoring the implementation of the compact via a joint group. I undertook to come back to Parliament to report on progress. Today, I published the joint group's report on compact implementation for 2000-01 and copies are now available in the Scottish Parliament information centre and on the Scottish Executive website. The report reflects the broadly positive experience that we have of working together.

The adoption of the compact's principles makes a difference to the experience of the sector on the ground in dealing with the public sector. We want to develop further that area of work. The Executive is starting to take a much more sophisticated approach to compact implementation. We have followed up the publication of the compact and good practice guidance with training seminars for Executive staff and we hope to develop further support materials for officials.

The improvement in conditions for the sector is not all to do with the compact. Funding also plays a key part—obviously, levels and stability of funding are of critical importance to the sector. Our funding for the sector is growing. In 1998-99 the then Scottish Office provided £23 million directly to the voluntary sector. Earlier this month I announced that the figure had risen to planned expenditure of £39 million in this financial year. A further £270 million goes to the sector indirectly, through Scottish Homes, health boards and local enterprise companies. Total Executive direct and indirect funding to the sector is estimated at around £309 million.

As well as giving the voluntary sector more money, we have committed ourselves to reviewing how we fund the voluntary sector. In April we published a consultation document on the subject. The responses to that document welcome the review and generally express support for our aims and objectives. The development of a more stable funding environment, provision of three-year funding packages and steps to minimise bureaucracy were welcomed. Concerns were expressed that the Executive and other funders favour innovative projects, at the expense of existing core services with a proven and successful track record. There was support for the simplification and standardisation of grant processes. There was also support for making information more accessible on the Executive's website and enabling grants to be done online.

We shall take on board all those issues and we intend to pilot a model scheme in 2002-03, before moving to full implementation across the Executive from 2003-04.

The next stage is to turn our attention to considering our indirect funding of the sector. The recent consultation sought views on scoping that work further. We will also work with other funders to try to ensure that the funding schemes available to the sector offer resources that are complementary and that are not at cross-purposes.

We are also committed to undertaking a review of the social economy. With the aid of Stephen Maxwell, the assistant director of the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations, who has joined the Executive on secondment, we are examining the current contribution of the social economy to service provision and economic prosperity and the potential for social enterprise and the development of social capital. We will also consider what actions the Executive and others must take to grow that contribution.

We are considering new ways of funding the sector. Last week we launched social investment Scotland, a new loan fund for the social economy. It will provide loan finance and technical assistance to social economy organisations with the aim of stimulating wealth in disadvantaged communities by encouraging enterprise. The four Scottish clearing banks are providing loan finance of £3 million and public sector funding is £2 million, which includes £1.2 million of Executive grant.

As well as addressing funding issues, we recognise that charity law in Scotland needs to be updated to take account of changes in the structure, nature and role of the voluntary sector. We established an independent commission, under Jean McFadden, to examine the issues involved. Its report was submitted to ministers in May and the Executive is currently consulting widely on the recommendations made. We anticipate publishing a full response early in 2002.

Tricia Marwick (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP): I welcome the Scottish Charity Law Review Commission. Can the minister indicate when we might expect legislation to allow charity Scotland to be set up?

Jackie Baillie: As I said, we anticipate publishing a full response early in 2002. Any bill must take its place alongside competing priorities in a full legislative programme. I cannot give Tricia Marwick a commitment that legislation will necessarily be brought forward in this session.

I mentioned the key role of volunteers. We are committed to increasing the number of people from all communities who take part in voluntary activities. To achieve that we are pushing forward our active communities initiative. Last year, we made available £650,000 to support the initiative. This year, we have increased that to £1.65 million. We have also joined in the celebration of the United Nations international year of volunteers 2001. I know that many members throughout the chamber have also been involved.

We also support the millennium volunteers programme, which is a UK-wide initiative that promotes volunteering specifically among 16 to 24-year-olds. It creates opportunities for young people to contribute to their community and to their personal development through volunteering. We currently fund about 2,000 places across Scotland at a cost of just under £700,000 per year. The millennium volunteers programme is relatively new and we are keen to learn from its early experience. I can announce that the programme will continue in its present form until the end of 2002-03.

We have already announced that we will make available £1 million a year to ensure that people who volunteer to work with children and vulnerable adults in the voluntary sector may have criminal record checks carried out at no cost to the volunteer or to the voluntary organisations concerned. At the same time, we said that up to £250,000 a year would be available for a central registered body. I am pleased to announce today that Volunteer Development Scotland will be invited to act as that central body. As the national centre for volunteering and community involvement, VDS already has close links with volunteers and with the voluntary sector. We can feel confident that the sector will receive the necessary help and guidance to make the best possible use of criminal record checks.

The Scottish Executive values the contribution across Scotland of the voluntary sector—from small community groups to Scotland-wide providers; from playgroups to care providers; and from faith communities and their volunteers to the way that the sector tackles homelessness, drug addiction and the other difficult issues faced by our communities. The sector is a key partner for Government, but it is also a key partner in our communities, whether they are geographical communities, disadvantaged communities or communities of interest. The sector tackles and alleviates poverty and helps to renew our neighbourhoods. Partnership will deliver social justice in Scotland. Our partnership with the voluntary sector is critical for success. Together, we can—and will—make a difference.

I move,

That the Parliament welcomes the Executive's recognition of the important role of the voluntary sector in Scottish society through the contribution it increasingly makes to promoting social justice, encouraging active citizenship and widening economic prosperity; endorses the progress made by the Executive in its commitment to working in partnership with the sector through the framework of the Scottish Compact, and welcomes the commitment demonstrated by the Executive through its increased resourcing of the sector.

15:21

Mr Kenneth Gibson (Glasgow) (SNP): I warmly welcome this debate and agree wholeheartedly with much of the minister's speech and the objectives and aims that she outlined.

Increasingly, the Parliament has recognised the third sector's invaluable contribution to Scottish life. Without it, how could we begin to tackle poverty, regenerate communities or promote active citizenship? How could society function with any real quality of life and how could we replace volunteers' ceaseless commitment and their massive contribution to the Scottish economy and society? In previous debates, I have been impressed by the commitment that members across the chamber have shown to the voluntary sector and by their clear understanding of it. Those members include Cathy Peattie, Des McNulty, Robert Brown, Jamie McGrigor, Keith Raffan and George Reid, to name but a few.

Although the SNP is broadly supportive of the Executive, I wish to raise a number of points. Across the voluntary sector, the issue of funding is often at the forefront. Financial support must not come at a price. Organisations must retain their independence without big brother looking over their shoulder. No doubt Bill Aitken will cover that point when he speaks to his amendment, which specifically addresses the issue. I am pleased that the minister has offered reassurances with regard to the Scottish compact on that matter.

The public must have equality of access to independent advice and information services and the Executive must ensure an even spread of services across Scotland. As the minister will acknowledge, much essential work has still to be done in that area if social exclusion is to be tackled effectively.

The Government and Executive should consider the impact on the voluntary sector when implementing legislation or making changes in benefits. For example, 77 per cent of Department of Social Services forms advise people to go to citizens advice bureaux for help and advice, but little thought has been given to the increased work load that such a suggestion places on CABx. The need for additional resources in such circumstances is often ignored. It should not be.

The minister mentioned additional resources for the voluntary sector. The SNP welcomes funding increases even if, in some cases, they simply fill a gap left by cuts elsewhere, but as the minister is aware and as the SNP amendment points out, a number of concerns about statutory funding procedure remain.

At last week's Social Justice Committee meeting, the SCVO raised a number of matters that our amendment touches on. For example, high transaction costs might arise when a voluntary organisation applies to a variety of funding schemes that all have different timetables, compliance regimes and application forms. The smaller the organisation, the greater the hurdle to overcome. The Executive has acknowledged that problem in the past and, in the voluntary sector debate on 23 September 1999, the former Minister for Communities, Wendy Alexander, committed the Executive to resolving the issue. However, it has not been entirely resolved.

Consistency among public sector funders is essential if we are to have a true measure of how effective an organisation is. Standardised audit procedures, funding periods and inflation costings would go a long way to ensuring that consistency.

Pilotitis—a great word for "Call My Bluff" aficionados—is the issue that causes most irritation to voluntary organisations and was touched on in the minister's opening speech. Pilotitis is the funding of exciting and innovative new projects that are unproven, which soak up resources that are urgently required by established organisations that provide vital services, yet which often struggle to survive, let alone excite or innovate. A more appropriate balance must be struck to ensure that new projects can emerge without cannibalising money that is required by existing, successful ventures.

One hopes that the power of community initiative that is to be introduced will secure leadership in the public sector in relation to the cocktail approach to funding, which can, on occasion, cause voluntary organisations to divert considerable staff resources and time to the accessing of funds. I trust that the minister will address that issue in her winding-up speech.

The lack of agreement on the scope and rationale of core funding impacts on any voluntary organisation. Having read our amendment, the minister touched on that matter in her speech. Placing emphasis on projects rather than organisations can lead to instability in the sector, making it more difficult to make long-term plans and leading to a detrimental effect on morale, staff retention and the day-to-day running of an organisation. Direct funding is a nettle that has been grasped south of the border, yet it is still to receive proper consideration in Scotland. Robert Brown may want to elaborate on that issue in his speech, in the context of citizens advice bureaux.

The SNP agrees with the SCVO that more thought should be given to the changing children's services fund—the specific role of which we hope the Executive will soon clarify—to the development of child care services and to community empowerment funding. As the minister will know, an uneasy feeling remains throughout the voluntary sector that real empowerment is still elusive, with resources remaining tightly controlled by the Executive through local government, social inclusion partnerships and so on. I am sure that the minister will agree that that issue continues to vex the voluntary sector, which seeks genuine community empowerment. I am pleased that the secondment that the minister mentioned will work towards addressing that.

Members will recall a rather heated debate last spring on the phasing-out of relief from water and sewerage charges for charitable bodies. During that debate, members from all parties raised concerns regarding the impact that that could have not only on small and fragile organisations, but on larger groupings that may have to cut staff as a result. In May, the Executive announced the postponement of the phasing-in of its policy until April 2002, but 40 per cent of reliefs will be withdrawn in the first year, which will cause hardship.

Even if the Executive introduced a new, more targeted relief scheme, as suggested by the Transport and the Environment Committee, the overall loss to the sector would be considerable. We could argue about statistics—for example, the withdrawal of relief would cost the voluntary sector £4 million in the first year according to the Deputy Minister for the Environment and Rural Development, compared with £54 million according to my colleague Richard Lochhead—but whoever is right, the withdrawal of relief will have an adverse impact, which could outweigh the additional support that the minister has recently allocated to the sector. Therefore, the SNP endorses the view of the Scottish Charity Law Review Commission that Scottish charities should receive at least 80 per cent relief from water and sewerage charges.

The SNP also shares concerns about the role of the national lottery. The UK Government is funding more and more statutory bodies via that route, which will undoubtedly impact on the voluntary sector; for example, the community fund is set to decline. Although the lottery is a reserved matter, the Parliament must develop a role in holding national lottery funding distribution bodies to account.

I am sure that this afternoon's debate will be positive. However, everything is not quite rosy and much remains to be done. I urge members to acknowledge that fact by supporting the amendment in my name.

I move amendment S1M-2245.1, to leave out from "the commitment" to end and insert:

"additional direct funding, while acknowledging that many issues such as transaction costs, consistency, sustainability, leadership, core and statutory funding and the adverse impact of planned phased removal of water reliefs from charitable organisations remain to be addressed."

15:29

Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh (Central Scotland) (Con): I am pleased to make the opening speech for the Conservatives in this timely debate on the voluntary sector. It is my first opportunity to speak from our front bench on social justice issues and I look forward to working and debating with colleagues, the Minister for Social Justice and her deputy.

I had hoped that the change in my portfolio responsibility would mean putting some distance between me and motions that are full of self-congratulatory pats on the back and about how wonderful the Executive is. However, that was not to be. The minister has set before us a motion that exhorts us to recognise

"the important role of the voluntary sector in Scottish society"

and encourages us to endorse

"the progress made by the Executive in its commitment to working in partnership with the sector".

On behalf of my party, I am happy to agree that the voluntary sector plays an enormous part in Scottish society, but the amendment in Mr Aitken's name urges the Executive to allow

"a more independent role for the voluntary sector in future."

Members would not expect a signal that we on the Tory benches have no concerns that we wish to express or observations on which the minister might usefully reflect. She should think of what I am about to say as helpful suggestions, offered in a spirit of encouragement.

It is difficult to get a perspective on how important the voluntary sector is, but we know that it is undoubtedly the fastest growing area of employment in Europe and that that trend is likely to continue. As the minister mentioned, there are 44,000 organisations with 100,000 paid staff and up to 500,000 regular volunteers. That is to say nothing of the income, which is estimated to be between £1.6 billion and £2 billion a year.

The voluntary sector covers a huge and diverse range of interests, including economic and community development, education and training, campaigning and advocacy, culture and recreation, health, environment, housing and child care. There is barely an area of our lives that the voluntary sector does not touch. All the organisations have a general definition, in that they are non-profit distributing—which is, in itself, an interesting facet—non-statutory and autonomous and may be charitable. The autonomous and non-statutory nature of the organisations is highly prized by the volunteers who give their time and effort to support them. Despite the amount of funding from Government and local authority sources, that independence entitles the voluntary sector to make critical observations. As I have said, critical observation can sometimes help to channel one's vision.

SPICe has produced an excellent briefing, which shows the sources of funding: loan finance provides 9 per cent; grant-making trusts provide 6 per cent; trading rents and investments provide 30 per cent; the public sector provides 26 per cent; the national lottery provides 7 per cent; and donations provide 22 per cent. Not all voluntary sector organisations get their money from the same sources or in the same ratio and finding out how much goes to whom is like asking about the length of a piece of string. Funding varies from organisation to organisation.

What gives rise to concern is the fact that the overall contents of the piggy bank remain the same and are probably decreasing. That gives the lie to the Executive's proclamation that it is committed to the sector through its increased resourcing. If the Executive views the voluntary sector as a crucial social partner, why are there increasing calls from organisations for further resources? The Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations has identified some of the problems—the minister and Kenny Gibson commented on them. They include: transaction costs; unsustainability and the cocktail approach to funding, which reeks of the reinvention of the wheel and, sometimes, of job creation; failure to agree on the dimensions and purpose of core funding; and, subsequently, a focus on projects alone. I enjoyed Kenny Gibson's definition of that a great deal. It was wonderful.

I did not dream up those problems. They are to be found in the briefing for today's debate prepared by the SCVO as it awaits the outcome of the consultation by the voluntary issues unit. If the minister will not listen to my entreaties to let the voluntary sector be her guide, I ask her to listen to the SCVO, whose members, as she pointed out, are at the sharp end.

I know that MSPs' time is limited and that, if there were 25 hours in a day and eight days in a week, we would all like to donate more time to charities and organisations that have a special place in our hearts. We have all had the opportunity to be VIP volunteers—some of us for several organisations—and I will wager that, on all of our guest appearances, we heard tales of a shortage of provision and of a lack of dedicated funding. Our job is to raise awareness and see for ourselves the work that is being done week in and week out.

My most recent experience of VIP volunteering was in the lunchtime cafe at the Morven House day centre project in Kilmarnock. That was on 1 June. I cooked, cleaned and waitressed—it was a bit like being a housewife—not just for the centre's clients, but for the volunteer staff. The work was intense and I confess that, at the end of the shift, I was glowing. That cafe could run seven days a week given the opportunity.

I read with interest the Executive's press release of 4 September, which announced a £39 million cash bonanza. The image of the minister playing the parts of Little Joe, Hoss and Paw Cartwright, weighed down with saddlebags of money from the Carson City Bank, ably supported by the deputy minister in the role of Miss Kitty, was a delight.

Jackie Baillie: I regret that I am from a different generation to Mrs McIntosh and so I am not picking up the references that she is making.

Mrs McIntosh: Some of the old stuff was broadcast on satellite. I do not recall the theme tune for "Bonanza" too clearly myself, but there is a prize for the person who can remember it.

Mr Gibson: Where is John Young?

Mrs McIntosh: He is probably back in the office somewhere.

Although the latest announcement may be the biggest ever allocation of direct funding to voluntary groups, we must be concerned about the squeeze on council budgets, which has frozen or reduced grants to voluntary groups in a number of areas over recent years.

We should also be concerned about the reduction in charitable giving due to the national lottery. I ask members whether they remember the jackpots that there used to be as we waited with bated breath for Lancelot or Guinevere to throw up the numbers that were on our tickets. Now we wait for a roll-over before we part with our cash. Anyone can see that charitable giving is down. Perhaps colleagues will return to that point later in the debate.

The Executive offers pockets of money and—in the interests of balance—big wedges of money for its pet projects. I say to the minister that that reeks of control freakery gone mad.

Although the Scottish compact is an agreement between the Government and the voluntary sector, its prime motivation seems to be for the Executive to have control to target Government priorities. I am not saying that the Executive and the voluntary sector do not have a lot of shared goals—of course they do—but that marriage of ideals is likely to end up on the rocks if the Executive's emphasis on its priorities leads to loss of independence for the voluntary sector, which will be directed by Government under contract, rather than by its own principles of channelling funding—

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Patricia Ferguson): Wind up, please.

Karen Whitefield (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab): Will the member give way?

Mrs McIntosh: I cannot give way, as I am in my last minute. I am sorry.

Karen Whitefield: Is what Mrs McIntosh says the view of the voluntary sector?

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Carry on please, Mrs McIntosh. You are winding up.

Mrs McIntosh: It is the view of the voluntary sector. Further confirmation of that view comes from a senior committee of the Parliament. The Finance Committee stated:

"The emphasis on meeting the Executive's priorities leads to voluntary organisations distorting their work and organisation in fact or appearance, to make it appear that they are meeting these priorities."

Such concerns are not new. As long ago as 1998, Neil McIntosh—he is no relation of mine—then convener of the SCVO, wrote in the SCVO's annual report:

"Of course we need to be aware of the dangers of loss of individual identity—what makes the voluntary sector special is its diversity and pluralism which do much to enrich our society."

We are now full circle. The voluntary sector values its independence and it likes to be able to respond quickly to needs rather than wait for the lumbering involvement of Government.

Other members will develop those thoughts further, but I ask members to support the amendment in Mr Aitken's name and allow a more independent role for the voluntary sector in future.

I move amendment S1M-2245.2, to leave out from "and welcomes" to end and insert:

"regrets the Executive's use of funding mechanisms to direct the work of the voluntary sector and urges the Executive to allow a more independent role for the voluntary sector in future."

15:39

Robert Brown (Glasgow) (LD): I hesitate to follow in the footsteps of Lyndsay McIntosh, who has given an inimitable view of the problems of the voluntary sector.

To be more serious, there can be little doubt that the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Executive have been far more supportive of and engaged with the voluntary sector than any Government or Parliament before us. I do not make those rather extravagant claims lightly. Members share with the voluntary sector many things, such as a belief in the value of public service and a welcome for the invaluable role of the voluntary sector throughout Scottish society and, as the minister said, in major contributions to policy. We also share a recognition that organisations outwith and independent of Government can not only provide the human touch, but relate in ways that are accepted by and relevant to the situations of people who are in various forms of need.

We have had many debates on the voluntary sector in the Parliament. Those debates have acknowledged that Scotland would be a much poorer place without the 40,000 voluntary groups and the work of the 500,000 regular volunteers. Those are the figures for the SCVO. For some reason the Scottish Executive consultation document "Review of Funding for the Voluntary Sector" talks about 700,000 volunteers. I hope that we have not lost 200,000 since the document was produced in April.

The truth, more seriously, is that all those figures are estimates and they may well be an understatement of the true extent of volunteer activity in Scotland. The Scottish Executive has done much to sharpen the principles of its support for the voluntary sector and to increase the level of available funding. I will not rehearse the minister's arguments again. I agree with them all.

I do not think that the debate is all that suitable for party-political motions. It is perhaps slightly regrettable that we have two amendments to the motion before us today. I was particularly intrigued by the SNP amendment, which did not appear to represent either SNP policy or a commitment to go about things differently. In fact it is a straight lift out of the SCVO briefing to which we referred earlier.

Linda Fabiani (Central Scotland) (SNP): Does the member accept that if the coalition Executive is more than willing to consult and take the voluntary sector on to working groups and task forces and to increase participation, it is perfectly acceptable for the Opposition to consult the voluntary sector?

Robert Brown: Indeed, I accept that entirely. However, the issue is the use of that consultation in terms of the debate—it is as if the Opposition is putting some sort of alternative on show. The fact is that the issue should be viewed more positively because we are at a milestone for the voluntary sector. We have the local councils for voluntary service now in place throughout Scotland as well as volunteer development agencies. The Executive has gone over to three-year funding, charity law is to be modernised, and the SCRO—Scottish Criminal Record Office—checks funding issue is resolved.

The Scottish compact has recognised in principle, and increasingly in practice nationally, the independent role of the sector. I pay tribute to the personal commitment of the ministers in that regard. Work has to be done in a number of areas to build on that. We cannot get away from the problem of core funding. The whole chamber would accept that too much time is wasted by government—largely local government—and by voluntary groups in putting together packages for funding. That is a skilled task, which often requires the expertise of experienced fundraisers.

Many important organisations are still not funded by local authorities on a three-year basis. Often there is little recognition that employees in the voluntary sector are not volunteers—they earn their livings and they feed their families. That is an important point. There needs to be adequate provision for pensions, for appropriate gradings and for funding the higher cost of a long-serving employee. That cannot be spread across other activities in an organisation with only one or two employees.

We need to recognise, as Executive officials did—to their credit—when they gave evidence to the Social Justice Committee last week, that although innovation is good, it is not always possible to churn over the projects. Lyndsay McIntosh and Kenny Gibson touched on that. There is a place for capacity building and for weeding out those projects that do not work from those that do.

There is also undoubtedly a need for stable and reliable core funding, which is extremely tricky to bring about. There has got to be some sort of independent mechanism, perhaps standing slightly outside the local authorities, for doing part of the work of deciding which projects are good and which are bad and for deciding the levels at which they are funded for some of the major bodies.

I am slightly concerned at the implications of the statement made by one of the Scottish Executive officials to the Social Justice Committee last week. He said:

"There is a growing recognition that the voluntary sector is a commercial sector in many ways and ought to be capable of finding solutions that are more commercial for some of its funding problems."—[Official Report, Social Justice Committee, 19 September 2001; c 2516.]

I do not disagree with that, so far as it goes. However, there is a limit to that—it does not apply to many sorts of voluntary groups. We must beware of creating a sort of voluntary sector public finance initiative philosophy, because the resources derived from the private sector in various ways, or even, in some other ways, from public sector paying through charging are not illimitable and do not necessarily apply in all sectors.

The other milestone area, which comes back to Kenny Gibson's prediction, is the potential for an effective, accessible and adequate national advice service on debt and housing matters in particular. That is a vital priority because of the implications of the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 and of the diligence report, "Striking the Balance", which the Parliament will consider shortly. In my view, it is time to place a statutory duty on local authorities to provide independent advice and, more important, to fund such services appropriately. I welcome the steps that the Executive has taken in that direction.

Kenny Gibson touched on the issue of the DSS forms and the resulting pressures on people to visit CABx for advice and assistance. Of course that is why CABx exist, but they also deal with other activities such as eviction notices. In the past financial year, CABx dealt with about £60 million-worth of debt advice, seeing about 140,000 clients and obtaining about £5 million-worth of additional benefits. I am talking about additional benefits that have been identified and I probably understated the total. The work of CABx and other agencies, such as money advice agencies, is simply irreplaceable.

The demands on existing projects will grow substantially. I do not know whether ministers have costed the extent of those extra demands, but I urge them to examine urgently the establishment of a national debt advice network and to agree an adequate level of resource—perhaps through a system of joint funding with local government—in order to make such a network a reality. There may be a case for an independent commission—similar to Malcolm Chisholm's care development group—to establish the extent of need and the resources required to meet that need. Irrespective of how the Executive does so, it must link need with the provision of resources.

The independence of the voluntary sector will be tested most effectively at the local level, where the concerns to which Lyndsay McIntosh referred echo more strongly than they do nationally. Local authorities have their own funding pressures and may not have the sophisticated approach that has been taken by Scottish Executive ministers.

There is no easy solution, but perhaps there is scope for more funding. For example, the Department of Trade and Industry provides funds to Citizens Advice Scotland to allow a mechanism under which the centre can encourage local authorities to enter into partnership. There may be a case for an independently funded voluntary sector trust.

Those important issues are worthy of more long-term consideration than we are able to give them today. It is important that, irrespective of political philosophy or party view, members across the chamber recognise the significance of the voluntary sector. I pay tribute to the Executive, which has gone further than others before it in supporting the voluntary sector. Let us, in partnership, build on that work, move forward and make the 21st century a milestone for the achievements of the voluntary sector.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We move to the open part of the debate. As a large number of members wish to speak, I ask those who are called to limit their speeches to fewer than four minutes.

15:47

Karen Whitefield (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab): The facts and figures about the third sector are almost common knowledge. Certainly, most members are aware of the size and scope of the voluntary sector in Scotland and of the level of finance that is attached to it. Most members also have a deep appreciation of the important role that the third sector plays in nurturing and sustaining all aspects of life in Scotland.

That level of awareness is testament to the significant impact of devolution on involving civic Scotland in the process of government. The voluntary sector in Scotland has gained a level of involvement and influence that would not have been possible at Westminster. However, we must not be complacent. We must work continuously to ensure that support for our voluntary sector remains a priority.

That is why I welcome the Scottish Executive's commitment to increase direct funding to the sector. As the minister said, in 1998-99, the Scottish Executive funded the voluntary sector to the tune of £23 million. That sum increased to £39 million in this financial year. Much of that additional funding has gone, rightly, into the development of the infrastructure of the voluntary sector, ensuring that Scotland has a national network of councils for voluntary service and contributing to the development of the SCVO web portal.

It is also right that other additional funding has gone into ensuring that voluntary organisations are not financially damaged by an issue that exercised many members: the need to carry out SCRO checks on volunteers. Ensuring the safety of children and vulnerable adults who come into contact with volunteers is a priority—one that is shared by the voluntary sector and the Executive. I especially welcome the minister's announcement that Volunteer Development Scotland will become the central registered body for the processing of applications for criminal record checks. It seems eminently sensible to place that responsibility on an organisation that understands volunteering in Scotland at every level.

The voluntary sector is at the heart of many of our debates, but it is also an important and influential partner in the development of all areas of policy and legislation. From my experience during stage 2 of the Housing (Scotland) Bill, I know that voluntary organisations such as Shelter Scotland and the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations played a vital part in the development of housing legislation. They were able to bring a high level of expertise and, at the same time, a sound knowledge of how legislation would impact at grass-roots level. Other voluntary organisations have been equally influential in the development of other pieces of Scottish legislation.

However, this Parliament still needs to address some voluntary sector issues. The complexity and variance of statutory funding mechanisms can be a real barrier to sustaining many voluntary organisations. It is important that the provision of funding should be seen as an opportunity for developing responsive services rather than as a constraint. It is also important that large funding bodies such as the national lottery should complement our specific social justice aims.

I am pleased to support the Executive's motion. The creation of the Scottish Parliament, with its Labour-led Executive, has already begun to deliver for the voluntary sector in Scotland. That delivery is evident in the creation and implementation of the voluntary sector compact; it is evident in the network of CABx across Scotland; it is evident in the active community strategy; and it is evident in the increased funding over the past few years. Most of all, it is evident in the strength of the voluntary sector's voice in Scotland. At long last, it is being given the recognition that it deserves.

15:52

Mr George Reid (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP): I want to pay tribute to the volunteers from Scotland who are playing a notable part in the fight against world poverty and, thereby, against terrorism. They are the Scotsmen and Scotswomen who are working in the relief and development agencies around the world on behalf of the poorest of the poor—the billion people who live, every day, below the poverty line and who are so easily attracted, through lack of hope and lack of food, to false gods.

People have been hurt this week. I think of former colleagues who are working in Taliban areas in Afghanistan on breast-feeding programmes and mother-and-baby programmes—they have been pulled out for their own safety. I think of water engineers whom I know in the Horn of Africa—again, pulled home for their own safety. I think of a dear, sweet Norwegian friend who has devoted all his life to making prostheses for young victims of land mines—he has been pulled back to Norway for his own safety. One of those people said to me last night that, if there is to be infinite justice, there must also be boundless mercy.

We in Scotland play our part. In the Parliament we have a cross-party group involving 40 international development and relief agencies. They do extraordinary work: microcredit in Uzbekistan; reforestation in Africa; clean water programmes for mothers and babies; fish farming in areas that are deprived of food—the list is infinite.

Last night, under the patronage of the Princess Royal in Edinburgh Castle, was launched the BESO Scotland strategy—the British Executive Service Overseas Scotland strategy—which involves the entire business community in Scotland in exporting their skills, as volunteers, to areas of need and, especially, to areas in accession states in eastern and central Europe. Two ordinary Scots were quite remarkable. One was Margaret Dryden, a primary teacher. Virtually single-handedly, she revitalised the whole primary school system in Douala in Cameroon, after which she went on to do the same in Kirovohrad in central Ukraine. The other was the remarkable Joe Tarnowski from St Andrews who, at the age of 78, has just completed his 43rd mission to Poland to help to restructure local companies and local government.

We have a part to play in this. I know that this issue is a reserved matter. I pay the highest tribute to Clare Short, because she properly has focused British international relief on the support of the poorest of the poor. I pay tribute also to George Foulkes when he was in his previous job, when he was Clare Short's deputy. In August 1999, he called for much closer twinning between the voluntary sector in Scotland and the voluntary sector in countries overseas. One or two of the steps that he called for we have outlined already. We have a development group, we are working on development education, and there is a specific network—the Network of International Development Organisations in Scotland—of the agencies that are working in Scotland. But much more has to be done.

I throw a few ideas to the Minister for Social Justice and the Deputy Minister for Social Justice. Frankly, if they can do Mothers Against Drugs in Alloa and Cranhill, they can help to do it in Narva. If they can do clean water programmes here, they can do them in Africa. If they can do meals on wheels in our multistoreys where the lifts do not work, they can do them in eastern Europe. If they can do sex education in Scotland, they can do it in some of the emergent states of eastern and central Europe. If they can do deaf-blind surveys in Scotland, they can export them to other parts of the world. They can provide special help to the poorest of the poor, because I know who the poorest person in the world is—it is a young woman amputee. From my experience, such people are never released from camps run by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other organisations. We could take some of those people here.

I hope that the Minister for Social Justice will reply to a recent letter that she received from Paul Chitnis, the chief executive of NIDOS, in which he said:

"it was suggested that I request a meeting with you so that I can tell you more about our work and discuss ways in which the Executive might support the Network."

I hope that the minister will agree to that, and I hope that she will take one or two members of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on international development. She may just have a word with her colleague Jack McConnell so that when he publishes his external affairs policy, he encourages the efforts of Scots relief and voluntary agencies as part of that effort.

15:57

Mr David Davidson (North-East Scotland) (Con): I congratulate George Reid on his speech, which puts some of today's debate into a world perspective, and brings a sense of reality to our discussion.

I speak today as a father who willingly and without strings supported his daughter's wedding on Saturday—a voluntary but expensive activity. The Deputy Minister for Social Justice may raise her eyebrows and wonder what is coming next, but there is a moral to the story, which is that apart from giving my daughter away, my contribution was to sign the cheque. What I did not do was put in place a bureaucracy that interfered with her freedom and independence to organise her wedding.

The Deputy Minister for Social Justice may know what I am about to say, which is that I agree with most people that our Scottish volunteers are unsung heroes. They work in every community and they add to the quality of life for so many. We cannot quantify how much they do in our society.

Community implies the coming together of people with a common interest or a shared location, and it only works when people have the freedom to join together to work for the common good, while ensuring that no one is left out. That is the sentiment behind my colleague Bill Aitken's amendment. We Conservatives want to see a set of strong and vibrant communities doing many things for themselves in creative and locally focused ways. The problem is that the Labour Government over the past four years has taken away the freedom of the voluntary sector to do what it does best, which is to organise locally and nationally to meet perceived need in the way that it thinks it should go about doing so.

We see a trend towards over-regulation and direction, despite the warm words of the Minister for Social Justice earlier. In fact, in some areas the Government could be accused of seeking to provide services on the cheap through the way that it directs the voluntary sector. I have no difficulty with a trained and resourced voluntary sector providing subcontracted services when that is the best way to deliver them, but allowing the sector to do the jobs in the way that it would like to do them is much better than the heavy-handed approach that we see.

The voluntary sector was robbed when lottery funding was directed from good works to supporting core, centrally delivered services that used to be delivered from taxation. The increased burden on UK taxpayers of more than £1,500 per person has reduced their ability to donate to charity. That reduction is shown in the contribution of the public to the national lottery, which is down from £411 million in 1996 to around £300 million today.

The double hit for the rest of the community was the increase in taxation under the Government. Again, that reduces people's ability to give to charity. Many of the Government's actions have hit the voluntary sector directly by reducing people's ability to contribute and adding to running costs.

Some members have talked about overburdening bureaucratic costs and the worries and work of people that have to sign so many forms and agree with so many agencies to do a simple task. We must address that issue.

Other members have mentioned today the effect of water rates on the charity sector. I call on the Scottish Executive to continue with full water rates relief until the water industry bill passes through the Parliament's committees and comes to the chamber. It is to be hoped that that bill will provide some support to the voluntary sector.

Others have mentioned today the squeeze on the central direction of council budgets. In many cases, that has frozen or reduced grants to voluntary groups.

Lyndsay McIntosh mentioned the loss of lottery funds to the new opportunities fund. There is a distortion—which I have mentioned in a previous debate—in the separation of capital from revenue funding. It is time that we move towards abandoning that fund, but only after current projects are allowed to complete.

The chancellor has hit charities hard. Advance corporation tax credits have been removed. There is a great list of things that must be done by the Government to solve some of the problems that charities face today. I welcome the minister's offer to contribute to the payment of the police's checking system charge. I have argued strongly for that in the chamber and the minister has listened.

I do not argue about the fact that the Executive is trying to move forward. However, it has to pay more than just lip service to some of the things that it has said to us today. I hope that the minister in her winding-up speech will give us a real guarantee that we will see the removal of the bureaucratic burden that currently faces the voluntary sector.

16:02

George Lyon (Argyll and Bute) (LD): I begin by expressing my support, too, for much of what the minister said in her opening speech. In rural Scotland—for example, my constituency—the voluntary sector is absolutely vital to the life-blood of many local communities, especially those in our marginalised areas. If one looks at the role of the voluntary sector in a constituency such as mine, one sees that it takes up many of the activities that one would expect to be delivered by the public sector.

The voluntary sector has taken on the public sector's role in many areas—for example, in leisure provision—and made a much better job of it than the public sector did previously. The voluntary sector provides a wide range of activities, such as leisure, advice centres—which are crucial—care groups and special needs. Many economic development activities, such as highland games, cattle shows and folk, seafood and jazz festivals, are delivered by the voluntary sector for one simple reason: to develop economic activity in the area. The activities bring visitors and tourists and provide the life-blood for many of the tourist businesses in the villages where those activities go ahead.

The voluntary sector is vital, yet there are great gaps in provision throughout rural Scotland, for example, in the provision of citizens advice bureaux. In my constituency of Argyll and Bute we currently have no such bureaux. We have two advice centres, one in Bute and one in Islay. The Islay one is teetering on the edge of bankruptcy. Only now do we have a proposal in front of our local council to fund CABx for the first time in Argyll and Bute. If one considers the number of towns and villages in my constituency, that is a huge gap in basic provision.

When I speak to and attempt to help the existing voluntary organisations, which are operating well, they give me the same message time after time: that, although they have to go through a bureaucratic system, capital funding is not, by and large, a big problem. The main issue that faces those organisations time after time is core funding—revenue funding. Revenue funding lacks stability. A year-on-year scramble is required to try to secure funding from the council or another public body. No simple system guarantees that an organisation will be able to access its core funding for next year. A lack of core funding creates big problems for staff, because they are not sure whether they will have a job at the end of the financial year.

I welcome much of what the Minister for Social Justice said. She recognised that we must develop stable funding packages for such organisations. We must recognise that we cannot always come up with innovative projects and that the core projects that exist deserve support and must be continued if they are to supply those vital services for communities. Simplifying the funding systems would also go a long way towards helping, because in trying to access capital—whether from rural challenge funds or myriad other funding bodies—a huge amount of resources is often used up in developing a bid, although organisations are never sure whether their bids will be successful.

I will return to Islay, to show how serious the situation can be in small communities. I mentioned the Islay and Jura advice centre, which is about to go bankrupt because it cannot secure core funding. It serves a population of 3,000. There is no benefits agency, jobcentre or other body to service that community. The only voluntary body that provides that community with advice could go out of business in the near future if it receives no funding. That is how serious the situation is.

I would like the minister to recognise that rural Scotland has special problems, especially in remote communities such as those which I represent. I wonder whether the pilot projects that the Executive proposes will involve pilot work in rural communities to ascertain whether different mechanisms need to be put in place to address rural Scotland's needs. I hope that the minister will give us some assurance on that. I know that Jackie Baillie is coming to Argyll CVS's annual general meeting on Monday night. By God, she will be pressed hard for answers to the problems that I described.

16:07

Tricia Marwick (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP): The debate allows members to pay tribute to Scotland's voluntary sector—the paid workers and the volunteers without whom many services would grind to a halt or would never have existed.

Just before the 1999 election, I was asked to address the SCVO on the voluntary sector and the establishment of the Scottish Parliament. If my memory serves me well, I think that Sarah Boyack spoke for the Labour party. At that time, I worked for Shelter. I said that the voluntary sector had a huge opportunity to participate, influence and act in partnership with the Parliament and its committees.

The voluntary sector's policy development work is firmly rooted in practical concerns and action, which makes it uniquely placed to influence and inform debates, policies and legislation. I believe that the voluntary sector has done that. It is to be congratulated on engaging not only with the Executive and committees, but with MSPs of all political parties.

However—there is always a however with me—in 1999, I said that the voluntary sector had to retain its independence from the Government, regardless of the Government's political complexion. I hoped that the SNP would be the Government. Despite that, I urged the voluntary sector to retain its independence, because its primary interest is the people whom it represents and those for whom it provides services. The sector's primary interest is not simply in carrying out the latest Government initiative. It has a duty to speak out on behalf of the most vulnerable.

I was concerned when I read the suggestion in the Finance Committee report that the voluntary sector's emphasis on meeting the Executive's priorities

"leads to voluntary organisations distorting their work and organisation in fact or appearance, to make it appear that they are"

making Government priorities their priorities.

Johann Lamont (Glasgow Pollok) (Lab): Does the member agree that what is on offer is the possibility that the priorities of the voluntary sector will become the Government's priorities and that neither the voluntary sector nor the Government should shirk away from that?

Tricia Marwick: I accept Johann Lamont's point that the Government often takes on board the priorities of the voluntary sector—and so it should. We also need to acknowledge that the Government's priorities are sometimes fed through to the voluntary sector and that that is a problem.

I believe in partnership between the voluntary organisations and local government and central Government. I am in favour of complementary working. However, there is no excuse for leaving the voluntary sector to pick up the pieces that are left in the wake of budgets set by central Government and local government.

I welcome the report of the Scottish Charity Law Review Commission, which I have already mentioned. I hope that, notwithstanding the minister's response to my intervention, we move quickly to introduce a regulatory framework for charities in Scotland. That is long overdue and has simply never existed before.

Those of us who have worked in genuine organisations that particularly rely on fundraising know that there have been many scams in the past that the Scottish charities office has been absolutely unable to tackle. Such scams suggest that all charities are not quite kosher and are not quite what they claim to be. We need to take steps to root out those that are involved in scams and cons. I urge the minister to consider the time scale closely to see whether we cannot, in this first session of the Scottish Parliament, make a real difference to the charity and voluntary sector in Scotland.

16:12

Miss Annabel Goldie (West of Scotland) (Con): I apologise to the minister for being slightly late for her speech. I regret that. I should declare two interests. I am a board member of the Prince's Scottish Youth Business Trust. I am also an ambassador for the girl guides—which may be a remarkably brave move for the girl guides.

Those two areas of activity represent spheres of operation in Scotland in which a huge mass of voluntary activity takes place to very good effect. Perhaps it is always invidious to select individual areas of activity but, as other speakers have so eloquently indicated, the voluntary activity that takes place in Scotland is the backbone of much of our community and society.

In debates such as today's and in company such as this, it is tempting to ask, "What can politicians do?" Perhaps the more important question is, "What should politicians not try to do?" I recognise that the Scottish compact with the voluntary sector is a genuine attempt to identify the respective roles of the Government and the voluntary sector and to explore the mutual effort that may exist between those two agencies.

However, although the compact contains much that I believe to be good, it reflects the extent to which politicians expect to be involved. Therein lies the rub. It seems to me that people who engage in voluntary activity do so because they want to do it. They have a personal commitment, a conviction and an interest. They want to help. They certainly do not see themselves as Government agents or deliverers of Government policy.

I suggest that that distinction is important. Where public money is used, it is right that Government takes a proper interest in what that money is funding, but in my judgment Government should not have a prescriptive role or instruct a charity or other voluntary sector organisation how to spend money. The distinction is a fine one, but it is vital.

I was heartened that the minister said that she is committed to encouraging more volunteers to take part in Scottish life. That is a worthy sentiment, which I certainly applaud. However, people will not sign up if they think that they will become invisible, indirect agents of the Government. They will be resentful—that has to be avoided at all costs. The first question that such people will ask is whether they are being used to provide services on the cheap. Many others in the chamber who are involved in voluntary activity would echo me when I say that that is a patronising and insulting charge, but it is an understandable reaction from people who look at the spread of expenditure and say, "Why am I doing this? Does the Government provide the money to me to do this only because it is a cheap way of delivering policy?"

I support the view that the voluntary sector should be as flexible and as autonomous as possible, so that it can do what it thinks it ought to do, in the best manner that it can. That is the most effective way of allowing the voluntary sector to operate.

It is impossible to consider the issue merely in the context of Scotland; we have to consider the economic regime in the United Kingdom. Where the Government can help is by making some of the financial hurdles less challenging for the voluntary sector. Many parts of the voluntary sector pay VAT—many in the chamber would ask whether that is necessary. Is there not some mechanism whereby VAT is recoverable by those payers?

When the Conservatives were in power, they introduced gift aid and payroll tax. Those may sound like innocent, unimportant initiatives, but I think that they now represent the most common mechanism whereby funds are donated to the voluntary sector. That is indicative of a fine distinction: it is one thing for the Government to have a laudable intent about what should be going on and to be prepared to make money available to assist with doing it, but it is quite another for the Government to want to become involved indirectly in the discharge of that task. It is essential that, in our efforts to improve life for the voluntary sector in Scotland, we recognise that important distinction.

16:17

Robin Harper (Lothians) (Green): I will reinforce three points that other members have made and add a point of my own.

First, I had the honour of being present at the presentation from BESO Scotland, the business volunteering organisation that George Reid mentioned. The presentations by Margaret Dryden and Jo Tarnowski were absolutely inspiring—it is a pity that they could not speak to us today.

Secondly, I reinforce the points made by George Lyon and Robert Brown on citizens advice bureaux. Along with John McAllion, Christine Grahame and other MSPs, I attended the Citizens Advice Scotland conference in Dundee last month. The part that CABx play in developing social inclusion in Scotland is absolutely crucial. It is important that the Executive listens to the points that have been made on CABx and that it gives CABx the support that they need to function securely and effectively.

Thirdly, there is the complexity of funding that Robert Brown referred to at length. My experience, from talking to small groups, is that it is still the case that, if two or three people are running a small voluntary organisation, one of them might spend most of his or her time looking for funds. That is an appalling waste of voluntary resources, as that person could be doing something else.

Finally, voluntary organisations play a crucial part in the protection and enhancement of Scotland's environment. Over the next few years, we will need further help with areas such as recycling and conserving biodiversity in Scotland—help that many voluntary groups throughout the country already provide. I would like to know whether the Executive is asking itself how to take full advantage of what the voluntary sector is offering in respect of our environment. I have asked before whether the Executive has requested a full review of the policy on the administration of landfill funds. I know that the way in which those funds are administered is bound by regulation, but it is time that those regulations were changed to allow more of the funds to go into recycling.

16:20

Stewart Stevenson (Banff and Buchan) (SNP): There is clearly a wide welcome in the chamber for the initiatives to set up councils for volunteering and for volunteering development. The key question remains: are volunteers merely the cannon fodder for salaried staff in the voluntary sector? I was encouraged to hear Jackie Baillie say that there is £39 million for the voluntary sector; that tells us just how important it is.

I found much to agree with in Annabel Goldie's comments, as she pled for diversity through the voluntary sector. We should not be afraid of voluntary agencies taking approaches that diverge not only from one another's but perhaps from those of Government and local authority agencies. We can test other approaches and provide different doors for people with different needs or different attitudes to authority to walk through, if that is what they require.

I will focus on the problems faced by unpaid agencies and their workers and I will give some specific examples from the north-east of Scotland. The Grampian Addiction Problem Service—GAPS—was originally created to respond to a perceived local need and a desire to serve the local community. Highly qualified people work for the service, but they are unpaid. The ethos is therefore to serve the local community and to put local interests first. However, such agencies find it increasingly difficult to deliver their services, because of numerous problems. A voluntary agency with no salaried staff is not an agency with no financial overheads; it will have premises, phones and computers to maintain, and a whole series of activities and expenditures that continue between projects.

There has been a reduction in local government funding. GAPS and the Buchan Alcohol Service Information Centre had funding from Aberdeenshire Council withdrawn a couple of years ago. However, the council has still found £80,000—much more than either of those services got—to create its own in-house service, which has yet to prove that it can deliver anything of particular value.

At local level, there is competition between the professionals, who want to keep control of what is going on, and the volunteers, who work in the front line to respond to people's needs. The lack of core funding is making morale drop in the voluntary sector. It is becoming increasingly difficult for voluntary agencies to sustain themselves between projects. Indeed, agencies can be diverted from providing a service to their clients because they are having to create bids for funding. That is not terribly helpful.

It is great that the Executive has lifted the direct expenditure on the voluntary sector from £23 million to £39 million but, as has been said, £10 million might have to be taken off that total for water and sewerage charges, although the introduction of those charges has been postponed.

Robert Brown made a plea for direct funding from the Executive to many local agencies. I am in two minds about that. It may or may not work, but many voluntary agencies certainly believe that it is the way forward. However, if we cannot find a way of providing core funding to ensure continuity of service, many in the voluntary sector will simply be unable to deliver services and their clients will suffer.

16:24

Cathy Peattie (Falkirk East) (Lab): I welcome the minister's speech, particularly what she said about increased funding for the councils for voluntary service and volunteer development agencies. I am sorry that Lyndsay McIntosh is no longer in the chamber, because it is clear that she knows little about the voluntary sector and has little knowledge of what that sector was like under the Tories. She has clearly not spoken to the councils for voluntary service, which were better funded in areas with Tory MPs—that was the funding situation that the voluntary sector faced. The Tories' notion of the voluntary sector was a lady bountiful idea. The sector has changed—thank goodness for that.

The voluntary sector is an integral part of our society and this is our fourth debate on it. As we have heard, many volunteers are involved in the sector and there are 100,000 full-time workers. I challenge anyone to tell me of a sector in Scotland in which the workers—whether they are volunteers or paid workers—work harder or are more committed.

The councils for voluntary service play a key role in developing the infrastructure of the voluntary sector in our communities. They support the development of partnership at all levels; they are involved in training and in promoting participation and they support proactive campaigning. There are people from all classes, all ages and both genders in the voluntary sector.

We must never take the sector for granted. Sometimes, we have airy-fairy ideas of what the voluntary sector is and what it does. It is important that debates take place. The minister takes the voluntary sector seriously.

It is absolute nonsense and naive to say that, because the minister or the Executive is listening to the voluntary sector, the sector is expected to do as it is told. The voluntary sector in this country is active, independent and will not listen to any Government.

The voluntary sector is active at community level, in the local economy and in developing local exchange trading system—LETS—schemes, food schemes and credit unions. It is involved in training and education, supporting families in fighting drugs, environmental action and all aspects of our communities at different levels.

Organisations such as the Community Training and Development Unit in Falkirk—of which I am a member—take a key role in promoting links between local and national organisations. George Reid spoke on that subject. They encourage active citizens to consider political issues at local level and civic processes and they visit Parliament to listen to MSPs.

Scottish Women's Aid and the Scottish Rape Crisis Network provide support for women and their families. Such organisations work with local authorities and other agencies to build a coherent strategy to address problems. Voluntary Arts promotes the participation in the arts by young people and other groups and the development of folk, jazz and other festivals to which people go at weekends to enjoy themselves. Advocacy groups, campaigning groups, international aid and development groups all contribute to the vital work of the voluntary sector.

As I said, the voluntary sector has moved on and we should not get airy-fairy ideas that it is about nice people running jumble sales for poor people. The voluntary sector is the life and soul of Scotland.

All organisations face the issue of funding and resources, which inevitably I must talk about. Organisations say that funding—particularly from local authorities—has been static for several years and that they are trying to do more with less. I therefore welcome the minister's commitment to the voluntary sector, which will mean that it can tackle some of the obstacles in its path. In particular, I welcome the fact that the Social Justice Committee is to conduct an inquiry into the voluntary sector and will get out and listen to people. That is important—we should commend the committee for that and wish it good luck. It is important that the information that it gathers from the voluntary sector is included in the debate, but it is also important that that is not seen as the committee or the minister telling the voluntary sector what to do.

Funding consistency is needed. The voluntary sector needs to be sustainable and it needs to be encouraged to do the work that it is doing. For too long, innovation has been overemphasised. We need to deal with that. The voluntary sector cannot be expected to reinvent itself continually. Matched funding can be a nightmare and European funding can be a bigger nightmare.

We have an opportunity to work with the voluntary sector—of which we can be rightfully proud—and the minister is committed to doing so. We are in the right climate to listen to what the voluntary sector is saying and to ensure that it has the funding that it deserves.

16:30

Alex Neil (Central Scotland) (SNP): I follow on from what Cathy Peattie said—I agree with almost all of it—by making the point that we should recognise that we sometimes play on the voluntary sector. In particular, in the area of drugs, many people do voluntary work who, in an ideal world, would be backed by professional people or have such people involved in their work. Many a time we have to say, "Thank God people are prepared to volunteer to do the work," because if they were not there, many local issues would not be addressed properly.

We have heard some excellent speeches and some poor ones, but I will not say who comes into which category. It is fair to say that the best speech—from all the parties—came from George Reid. I will add a word or two to what he said. When international events and the impact of those events at home are uppermost in everyone's minds, the international dimension to volunteering and to the voluntary sector must have top priority from the minister.

That is not a constitutional point. I know that international development is a reserved issue—although I wish that it were not—but that does not prevent us from encouraging the voluntary sector to play an international role. That humanitarian—not constitutional—point must be uppermost in our minds.

I will give two examples of situations in which we should be encouraging urgent action by the international voluntary sector. The first is what will be a substantive refugee problem on the border between Pakistan and Afghanistan. The second is the most urgent situation in Palestine and that area of the world.

Through the voluntary sector, we have a major contribution to make and, although I recognise that the matter is reserved, I encourage the minister to do what she can to encourage, co-ordinate and facilitate voluntary working. She can make a significant contribution.

One of the great points about international affairs is that small nations that are not big power players are often trusted to do voluntary work. It is no accident that most of the secretaries-general of the United Nations come from small nations—the secretary-general could not come from America or Russia. We have a lot to contribute and we have done so down the years.

Brian Fitzpatrick (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab): Will the member give way?

Alex Neil: Unfortunately, I do not have time.

My other point is a more domestic one about what the minister said on the social economy review that Stephen Maxwell is carrying out. The social economy has not been mentioned much in this debate, but it has an enormous role to play, particularly in areas of multiple deprivation. In this country we think of entrepreneurship as being about profiteers or someone looking for a fast buck. However, there are many honest entrepreneurs. There are many entrepreneurs in the public sector—in education, health, transport and other areas. There is enormous scope for social entrepreneurship that is not about making a fast buck for oneself, but about serving the community. There are enterprising people who are capable of setting up and running businesses for the benefit of the whole community. I hope that the review will be positive and that action will be taken as a result of it.

There has been broad consensus among members in this debate—more or less. I have some empathy with aspects of the Tory amendment. However, I was persuaded by Conservative members' speeches not to vote for it. That is a pity, because it is important in a democratic society to ensure that the voluntary sector is not dictated to by the Labour party, by its coalition partners in the Executive, by my party or by any other party. The voluntary sector is there and the key point is that it must be independent and remain independent.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We now move to closing speeches.

16:35

Mr Mike Rumbles (West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine) (LD): Jackie Baillie started the debate by emphasising the excellent work that is being done by the voluntary sector. She said that 100,000 people are employed in the voluntary sector and highlighted that 27 per cent of adults regularly take part in voluntary work.

I emphasise the excellent work that is being done by our Labour colleagues in the ministerial team. I believe in giving credit where it is due and I congratulate the ministers on some very effective work. A comprehensive network of voluntary organisations has been set up. It is excellent that the Executive is working with the sector through the framework in the Scottish compact.

Projects are benefiting from the £39 million of funding, which is an increase of 18 per cent from last year. That is a real increase. I will give examples from my constituency. Family Mediation Grampian receives about £44,500. It aims to reduce the effect of parental separation or divorce. It helps couples to reach, after separation, negotiated agreements about residence, contact with children and other practical problems. It deals with real issues for real people.

Small projects also receive funding, for example Aberdeenshire Life Education Centre. It has received almost £4,500 to supply a mobile classroom and an educator to deliver a holistic approach to the prevention of substance abuse and to provide health education to schoolchildren. Those are two examples of the Scottish Executive helping to produce effective service delivery.

Having said that—there is always a but—I attended Gordon Rural Action recently. That organisation serves the Donside area of my constituency. Genuine concerns were expressed to the effect that funding goes to the network generally and there are worries about money not getting down to service providers. I emphasise those concerns.

I also receive observations, or complaints—call them what you will—from many organisations in my constituency, for example in Donside, Deeside and the Mearns, about too much time needing to be spent on accessing project funding. George Lyon and others have raised that point in the debate. Not enough attention is being given to core funding. Many groups, such as Gordon Rural Action, which I mentioned, and Mid-Deeside Ltd, which is a community-based company on Deeside, express that concern. I attend Gordon Rural Action's annual general meetings and they constantly tell me that core funding is a major issue for them.

I will focus on the main points that have come out of the debate. Cathy Peattie gave a first-class analysis of Lyndsay McIntosh's knowledge of the voluntary sector. I do not think that Lyndsay McIntosh was in the chamber to hear it, but I hope that she reads the Official Report tomorrow. She made some very negative comments about the Executive always indulging in backslapping and being self-congratulatory. I must say that I—[Interruption.] I am sorry; I find the Tories' constant negative amendments—such as the one that is before us today—to be the mirror image of that. The pot is calling the kettle black.

It is important to get across three points. One is the point that was made by Robert Brown about a statutory duty on local authorities to provide independent advice; that is essential. George Lyon said that there was no citizens advice bureau in his constituency; neither is there one in my constituency and that is the case in many rural areas of Scotland. A statutory duty must be put on councils in that regard.

George Reid's contribution unexpectedly and rightly opened up the debate to the role of Scots abroad in the voluntary sector. As Alex Neil said, it was the best speech of the afternoon. George Lyon concentrated on the difficulties of core funding.

The three core points are Robert Brown's point about a statutory duty to provide independent advice, George Reid's point about Scots working abroad in the voluntary sector and George Lyon's point that we must concentrate on the core funding issues.

16:40

Bill Aitken (Glasgow) (Con): Perhaps uncharacteristically, I agree with many of the minister's comments. Indeed, I can take issue only with her claim not to remember the cowboy series "Bonanza". When she stated that she was not of that generation, I think that she was asking us to accept a little porky pie. On the other hand, Mrs McIntosh remembers seeing only the repeats.

The debate has been fairly consensual and I do not wish to part from the combined approach that the Parliament has taken. We have heard some very good speeches from members and some good news from the Executive. First, I was pleased to hear that the long-overdue reform of charity law is well advanced and I look forward to seeing what is produced early next year. As Karen Whitefield correctly pointed out, anybody who has any connections to the voluntary sector will be pleased that the prospect of the potentially considerable damage that might have been caused by the funding of SCRO checks has been removed.

That said, the Conservatives differ from the Executive on one issue. The minister claimed—with some justification—that she has put more money into the voluntary sector. However, why has she done so? Surely the answer is that she trusts the sector to administer the funding. Having gone to that length, why does not she take the next step and allow the sector to get on with what it is good at doing, namely serving the community?

The debate takes place against the background of the justifiable pride that we can all take in the fact that 10 per cent of the Scottish population give of their time and do volunteer work. That is very beneficial. However, the minister should support that and not seek to stand in the way of and inhibit those volunteers. After all, they know best.

Cathy Peattie: I ask Bill Aitken to go back and read "The Scottish Compact". One of its major aspects is an agreement that the voluntary sector must remain independent.

Bill Aitken: I have read the document and agree with much that is in it. However, at the same time, it contains an inhibition. It is implied that the Executive will control funding and that funding will be diverted along what the Executive feels to be the appropriate channels. That is not the way to run things. The people out there know what is good for their communities. For example, George Lyon told us about the good that the voluntary sector does in the islands and Stewart Stevenson dealt with the situation in the north-east. People on the ground know far better than do people sitting in Edinburgh or Glasgow about what is best for their charity or good cause. That is the route that we should go down.

If the minister wishes to help—I know that she does—she should seek other ways in which she can assist the voluntary sector. She should ask her colleagues in Westminster to examine the effects of the taxation regime on charities. Furthermore, she should examine how the lottery operates. The lottery was introduced as a simple expedient to make more money available for charities. However, as David Davidson pointed out, over the past few years lottery funds have been used more and more to fund work that would otherwise have been funded from general taxation.

Johann Lamont: Does Mr Aitken share the concern that has been expressed by several of my constituents that disproportionate amounts of national lottery funding go to better-off areas and that proportionately little money comes into deprived areas? Furthermore, would he welcome an inquiry into the matter?

Bill Aitken: That intervention raises an interesting point that was dealt with to some extent in last week's debate on the situation in Sighthill. Perhaps it is the case that certain areas should be given assistance in the preparation and lodging of lottery applications. There is a case for that, because people in better-off areas are sometimes more able to complete applications than people in areas such as that which Johann Lamont represents.

George Reid was correct: we owe a particular debt to so many people who find themselves in possible danger as a result of their volunteering. However, the debate concerns the approach that we should take to the voluntary sector. Much of what the Executive says is of benefit and we agree with it, but it should realise that the voluntary sector is best left to its own devices.

16:45

Linda Fabiani (Central Scotland) (SNP): I say to Annabel Goldie that I, too, was delighted to be asked to be a guide ambassador, having never been a girl guide. I then discovered that Jamie Stone was one, which tarnished the honour a wee bit.

Mr Jamie Stone (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD): I most certainly was not a girl guide at any stage of my existence.

Mr Gibson: He just liked the uniform.

Mr Stone: I would say that Linda Fabiani is having a bad hair day but for the fact that I just saw her hair at close quarters down at the new Holyrood building.

Linda Fabiani: I meant that Mr Stone was a girl guide ambassador, not a girl guide.

Members have rightly paid tribute to many different volunteers from all over the country who carry out work here and abroad. I pay tribute to the volunteers who are working here on an international level, with refugees and asylum seekers who come here. I know that Jackie Baillie and Margaret Curran will meet many of those people in their new roles and that they will back me up on that. A lot of great work is going on in Sighthill and elsewhere in Scotland.

The SNP is broadly in agreement with what the Scottish Executive is trying to achieve and what it is achieving in our third sector. Anything that I say is meant in a spirit of co-operation. It is the role of the Government to put things in motion and the role of the Opposition to try to point out the shortcomings. In the creation of a better country for us all, it is also our role to point out what is likely to be problematic and to work together to find a better solution.

I make no apology to Robert Brown for quoting the SCVO—after all, the Executive looks on those people as experts in the field, which they are. That fact should be recognised. The SCVO has said that it is worried about the strategic overview of the voluntary sector. One part of the submission that it made to the Social Justice Committee concerned new approaches that have been taken in participation, planning and service development, which have had the effect of making the relationship among the voluntary sector, statutory agencies and councils less clear cut. There is concern about the way in which the Scottish Executive, local authorities and the voluntary sector are interacting and working together.

I have been told that many existing organisations in Lanarkshire feel that, although they have been assured by the Scottish Executive that the local authority has been given funding for specific projects in specific fields of voluntary work, the money is not getting through. There is a perception that, in wishing to be seen to fulfil their obligations in relation to consultation, the statutory agencies, health boards, health trusts and councils are starting to set up their own groups and are not acknowledging the views of the groups that have for many years been working at the front line.

I use the word "perception" because I do not know the reality of the situation. I raised the matter at the Social Justice Committee and was told by Executive representatives that the Scottish Executive is not monitoring whether the money that is given to local authorities is spent on the purposes for which it is given, when that money is not ring-fenced. I ask the minister and the Scottish Executive to address that.

Members mentioned voluntary organisations in relation to poverty in our country. We know about urban deprivation and rural deprivation, but I was stunned to hear George Lyon say that there is no citizens advice bureau in Argyll and Bute.

Jackie Baillie: George Lyon might not be aware that Argyll and Bute Council has recently agreed to fund a citizens advice bureau. I take it that he would welcome that.

Linda Fabiani: I am sure that George Lyon will thank the minister for that welcome information.

Members have spoken about the SCVO. I hope that this information is wrong—I ask the minister to correct me if it is—but I was told recently that the services within the council for voluntary services network are being given a set amount of money. I am worried that no account is taken of the areas in which those services operate.

Jackie Baillie: Account is taken of the areas in which the services operate and we specifically recognised in our review of the council for voluntary services that rural areas require additional input. As a consequence of that, we have made sure that extra money is available. For example, I believe that £290,000 is being made available in the Highlands, whereas less than that is being made available in urban areas.

Linda Fabiani: I would like to make a special plea for South Lanarkshire Council, which faces both urban and rural problems.

Kenny Gibson talked about the effects of legislative change on the voluntary sector. For example, he said that social security forms tell the applicant to go to a citizens advice bureau, which is difficult to do if there is none in the area.

The Executive must think strategically about the voluntary sector at every point, because its decisions and actions impact on the voluntary sector and its services. For example, although the problems relating to the SCRO checks have been sorted, we could have avoided the lobbying that took place on that if the proposal, which was worth while, had been thought through when it was introduced.

I read recently about hygiene regulations that will come into force and that will impact on the ability of soup kitchens to provide food for homeless people. I appreciate that hygiene regulations must be put in place, but the Executive must have regard for the impact that such regulations might have on the voluntary sector. I am worried that if an additional regulation is put in place without additional support, there will be less volunteering.

While the SNP broadly accepts the terms of the motion, we have a problem with the line that mentions

"the increased resourcing of the sector".

The Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations believes that there is evidence to suggest that, proportionally, the overall pot of voluntary sector funding is stagnant and is probably shrinking. Given the increased expenses for water companies—the removal of water relief, for example—we must think about that.

There is nothing in the SNP amendment that has not been mentioned by almost every speaker: transaction costs; consistency; sustainability; leadership; core and direct funding; and the adverse impact of the removal of water relief. I must therefore ask ministers to consider accepting the SNP amendment in the spirit of all that has been said today.

16:59

The Deputy Minister for Social Justice (Ms Margaret Curran): I am pleased to be here to respond to the debate on the voluntary sector. I welcome the changes that the various parties have made in their portfolios and greet my new sparring partners.

I came to the chamber today in a consensual mood, thinking that all members would do likewise. However, after a few words from the Tories, I found myself rolling up my sleeves. In response to Bill Aitken's rather impolite comments about Jackie Baillie's age, I must say that she has asked me to confirm that she does not remember "Bonanza" at all. The proof of that is that she is an ambassador for the brownies. I am glad that that is now established.

On a more serious note, the debate has been substantial. Many points have been made that are of great importance to the voluntary sector. There have been many speeches of quality and substance throughout the debate. The speeches attempted to deal with some of our policies and I will attempt to deal with those speeches in turn.

I particularly welcome the inquiry by the Social Justice Committee, which is examining the work of the voluntary sector. We look forward to working closely with the committee on the inquiry in the coming months.

I am sure that all members are aware that, as has been said in the debate, the Executive is acting decisively by pursuing a new relationship with the voluntary sector in Scotland. Over the past two years we have seen that improved partnership work. Indeed, the Executive considers the sector to be a key social partner. That can be demonstrated on a number of fronts.

The Executive's immediate aims have been to modernise the legal, financial and infrastructure framework for the voluntary sector. We have more recently placed an increasing emphasis on the social economy in Scotland, on which Alex Neil made some important points.

As Cathy Peattie said in a strong speech, "The Scottish Compact" is an extremely valuable document for promoting a strengthened partnership between the Executive and the voluntary sector. We aim to develop the compact further as the basis on which to strengthen relationships between the sector and Executive departments, agencies and non-departmental public bodies. The aim is to bed down the principles of the compact throughout the public sector. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and local authorities have been active in promoting and developing local compacts and funding policies for their relationship with the sector.

As well as our commitments to the sector as set out in "The Scottish Compact", we have spelt out commitments—as Linda Fabiani was trying to encourage us to do—in our programme for government and the social justice action plan. Our commitment to take positive action to benefit the sector is even imbedded in the budget process. Those commitments form a continuing programme to provide the best environment in which the sector can develop. We do not underestimate the complexities that are involved.

I return to a significant theme of the afternoon's debate. The Executive has always respected the voluntary sector's independence and its campaigning role. I argue that the Executive has shown willingness to listen to that sector. We appreciate that there are tensions inherent in that approach—we cannot be simplistic about it—but we believe that there is more to gain than there is to lose from partnership.

I listened carefully to the speeches about and the pleas for independence for the sector from throughout the chamber. In all sincerity, there is a degree of misunderstanding. I say to Lyndsay McIntosh that we could not allow the sector to be independent even if we wanted to. It is not within our gift to bestow that independence on the voluntary sector. Our partnership with the sector does not in any way undermine its autonomy.

On the personal comparisons that David Davidson made, as a good feminist I make it absolutely clear that partnership does not mean domination. The Executive's partnership with the voluntary sector does not mean that we dominate the sector—[Interruption.]

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): Far too many conversations are going on. That is very unfair to the minister, who is closing the debate. I appeal to members to sit down, keep quiet and listen to what is being said.

Ms Curran: The Executive recognises that, although we might sometimes get hurt by the voluntary sector's independence as the sector criticises us, we have more to gain than we have to lose from it. We acknowledge the pioneering role of the voluntary sector and want to facilitate that as much as possible. We recognise that the voluntary sector has prefigured a lot of what are now regarded as mainstream services, particularly in child care, but also in many other areas.

Throughout the voluntary sector, there is a willingness to recognise that it now has a receptive Government. Although it will never suspend its criticisms entirely, the sector has recognised and welcomed the reception that we have given to it because we have responded positively to major issues of concern to the sector. For instance, we have introduced a review of charity law, we meet the costs of criminal record checks on volunteers and fund the registration body and we have delayed for one more year the withdrawal of water rates relief for charities.

Points on water rates relief came up in the debate and I wish to address those. Ross Finnie announced on May 17 that the phased withdrawal of relief from a range of charitable organisations, which was to start this year, will be delayed for a year. That is to allow those who are affected some time to plan and budget. All remaining relief will be phased out by 31 March 2006. The water authorities have agreed to provide free water meters on request to the voluntary and charitable sector and are happy to provide advice on that matter.

Mr Davidson: I called on the Executive to maintain the relief until the Parliament has dealt with the proposed water services bill. What is the Executive's answer to that?

Ms Curran: That is a matter for Ross Finnie to answer specifically. Those of us who are responsible for the voluntary sector have gone some way toward ensuring that we support the sector in trying to adjust to the change.

The Executive has made available increased resources across the board. That is well recognised. We are increasing funding for the voluntary sector infrastructure from £4 million to £10 million over our first term of office. Direct funding has risen from £23 million to £39 million annually. We have instituted myriad new developments in funding. We are strengthening the voluntary sector infrastructure. Many of those points have been made in the debate and I will not repeat them.

We recognise that much of the increased funding will go into national voluntary organisations and infrastructure and into central initiatives. The Executive's approach has been strategic. Generally speaking, Executive funding for local service delivery is available only on an exceptional basis—for instance for pilot projects—and that has been mentioned.

We expect public sector funding for local bodies normally to come from other agencies, such as local authorities, health boards, local enterprise companies and some non-departmental bodies. We have recognised—as has been said in the debate—the need to address some fundamental points. The first phase of our funding review was, crucially, to deal with the need to bring stability to the sector. Our three-year indicative funding settlements within local authorities have contributed to that.

We are now aiming, within the second phase of our review, to look for a common approach across all our funding schemes. That will take on board the points that were raised about core funding. Through our work on underfunding, we aim to reduce concern about issues such as transition costs, which Kenny Gibson mentioned.

Another aim of our funding review was to identify gaps in the funding of the voluntary sector. We have already made extra funding available, for example, to BEMIS—the Black and Ethnic Minority Infrastructure in Scotland. That is an important part of the support that we offer. It is important that we discuss volunteering. We recognise the unsung heroes about whom many members have talked. Increasingly, volunteering is flourishing in its own right and making a difference, not only in the voluntary sector, but in public sector settings. All MSPs are well aware of that vital contribution to the fabric of local communities, to key organisations and to innovative service development. The Executive strongly supports the active communities initiative and will continue to do so.

We are strongly committed to maintaining our work in the rural sector and this year we have committed £2.6 million to the national network.

I am happy to address the points that George Reid raised, many of which were on overseas development. We strongly support his suggestions. Briefly, I say yes to those—the member will receive ministerial responses.

I am proud to be part of a Government whose first instincts were to use Britain's membership of the G8 to keep debt reduction on the agenda. I do not mean that in a party political sense. It is important that we now have a target to lift 1 billion people out of poverty by 2015.

I am being hurried to conclude. I assure the Parliament that the debate was not a cosy one for us—it was not about complacency. We have an ambitious agenda for the voluntary sector, which is a key partner that we will never dominate. The voluntary sector contributes to policy. We continue to fund it and look forward to an invigorating partnership in delivering the social justice agenda.

Scottish Parliamentary and Health Service Ombudsman Annual Report

17:04

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): The next item of business is consideration of motion S1M-2238, on publication of the Scottish parliamentary ombudsman and health service ombudsman for Scotland's annual report.

Motion moved,

That the Parliament notes that the Scottish Parliamentary Ombudsman and Health Service Ombudsman for Scotland intends to lay his Annual Report for 2000-01 before the Parliament and orders the Clerk to publish the report.—[Mrs Margaret Smith.]

Parliamentary Bureau Motion

17:04

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motion S1M-2255, on the designation of lead committees.

Motion moved,

That the Parliament agrees the following designations of Lead Committee—

the Justice 1 Committee to consider the Criminal Legal Aid (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2001 (SSI 2001/306);

the Justice 1 Committee to consider the Criminal Legal Aid (Fixed Payments) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2001 (SSI 2001/307);

the Justice 1 Committee to consider the Parole Board (Scotland) Rules 2001 (SSI 2001/315); and

the Local Government Committee to consider the Firemen's Pension Scheme (Pension Sharing on Divorce) (Scotland) Order 2001 (SSI 2001/310).—[Euan Robson.]


Decision Time

17:05

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): There are five questions to put to the chamber as a result of today's business.

The first question is, that amendment S1M-2245.1, in the name of Kenneth Gibson, which seeks to amend motion S1M-2245, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on Scottish Executive support for the voluntary sector, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

Members: No.

The Presiding Officer: There will be a division.

FOR

Adam, Brian (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Aitken, Bill (Glasgow) (Con)
Campbell, Colin (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Canavan, Dennis (Falkirk West)
Crawford, Bruce (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Cunningham, Roseanna (Perth) (SNP)
Davidson, Mr David (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Douglas-Hamilton, Lord James (Lothians) (Con)
Ewing, Dr Winnie (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Ewing, Fergus (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP)
Ewing, Mrs Margaret (Moray) (SNP)
Fabiani, Linda (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Fraser, Murdo (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Gibson, Mr Kenneth (Glasgow) (SNP)
Goldie, Miss Annabel (West of Scotland) (Con)
Harding, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Harper, Robin (Lothians) (Green)
Ingram, Mr Adam (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Johnstone, Alex (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Lochhead, Richard (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
MacAskill, Mr Kenny (Lothians) (SNP)
MacDonald, Ms Margo (Lothians) (SNP)
Marwick, Tricia (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Matheson, Michael (Central Scotland) (SNP)
McGrigor, Mr Jamie (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
McIntosh, Mrs Lyndsay (Central Scotland) (Con)
McLeod, Fiona (West of Scotland) (SNP)
McLetchie, David (Lothians) (Con)
Monteith, Mr Brian (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Morgan, Alasdair (Galloway and Upper Nithsdale) (SNP)
Mundell, David (South of Scotland) (Con)
Neil, Alex (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Paterson, Mr Gil (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Quinan, Mr Lloyd (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Reid, Mr George (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Robison, Shona (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Scott, John (Ayr) (Con)
Sheridan, Tommy (Glasgow) (SSP)
Stevenson, Stewart (Banff and Buchan) (SNP)
Sturgeon, Nicola (Glasgow) (SNP)
Swinney, Mr John (North Tayside) (SNP)
Tosh, Mr Murray (South of Scotland) (Con)
Ullrich, Kay (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Wallace, Ben (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Welsh, Mr Andrew (Angus) (SNP)
Wilson, Andrew (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Young, John (West of Scotland) (Con)

AGAINST

Baillie, Jackie (Dumbarton) (Lab)
Barrie, Scott (Dunfermline West) (Lab)
Boyack, Sarah (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
Brown, Robert (Glasgow) (LD)
Butler, Bill (Glasgow Anniesland) (Lab)
Chisholm, Malcolm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab)
Craigie, Cathie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab)
Curran, Ms Margaret (Glasgow Baillieston) (Lab)
Deacon, Susan (Edinburgh East and Musselburgh) (Lab)
Eadie, Helen (Dunfermline East) (Lab)
Ferguson, Patricia (Glasgow Maryhill) (Lab)
Fitzpatrick, Brian (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)
Gillon, Karen (Clydesdale) (Lab)
Godman, Trish (West Renfrewshire) (Lab)
Grant, Rhoda (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Gray, Iain (Edinburgh Pentlands) (Lab)
Henry, Hugh (Paisley South) (Lab)
Home Robertson, Mr John (East Lothian) (Lab)
Hughes, Janis (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab)
Jackson, Dr Sylvia (Stirling) (Lab)
Jackson, Gordon (Glasgow Govan) (Lab)
Jamieson, Cathy (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab)
Jenkins, Ian (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD)
Kerr, Mr Andy (East Kilbride) (Lab)
Lamont, Johann (Glasgow Pollok) (Lab)
Lyon, George (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
Macdonald, Lewis (Aberdeen Central) (Lab)
Macintosh, Mr Kenneth (Eastwood) (Lab)
MacKay, Angus (Edinburgh South) (Lab)
MacLean, Kate (Dundee West) (Lab)
Macmillan, Maureen (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Martin, Paul (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab)
McAveety, Mr Frank (Glasgow Shettleston) (Lab)
McCabe, Mr Tom (Hamilton South) (Lab)
McConnell, Mr Jack (Motherwell and Wishaw) (Lab)
McMahon, Mr Michael (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab)
McNeil, Mr Duncan (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab)
McNeill, Pauline (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab)
McNulty, Des (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab)
Muldoon, Bristow (Livingston) (Lab)
Mulligan, Mrs Mary (Linlithgow) (Lab)
Murray, Dr Elaine (Dumfries) (Lab)
Oldfather, Irene (Cunninghame South) (Lab)
Peacock, Peter (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Peattie, Cathy (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Radcliffe, Nora (Gordon) (LD)
Robson, Euan (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD)
Rumbles, Mr Mike (West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine) (LD)
Simpson, Dr Richard (Ochil) (Lab)
Smith, Elaine (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab)
Smith, Mrs Margaret (Edinburgh West) (LD)
Stephen, Nicol (Aberdeen South) (LD)
Stone, Mr Jamie (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
Thomson, Elaine (Aberdeen North) (Lab)
Watson, Mike (Glasgow Cathcart) (Lab)
Whitefield, Karen (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab)
Wilson, Allan (Cunninghame North) (Lab)

The Presiding Officer: The result of the division is: For 47, Against 57, Abstentions 0.

Amendment disagreed to.

The Presiding Officer: The second question is, that amendment S1M-2245.2, in the name of Bill Aitken, which seeks to amend motion S1M-2245, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on Scottish Executive support for the voluntary sector, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

Members: No.

The Presiding Officer: There will be a division.

FOR

Aitken, Bill (Glasgow) (Con)
Davidson, Mr David (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Douglas-Hamilton, Lord James (Lothians) (Con)
Fraser, Murdo (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Goldie, Miss Annabel (West of Scotland) (Con)
Harding, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Johnstone, Alex (North-East Scotland) (Con)
McGrigor, Mr Jamie (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
McIntosh, Mrs Lyndsay (Central Scotland) (Con)
McLetchie, David (Lothians) (Con)
Monteith, Mr Brian (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Mundell, David (South of Scotland) (Con)
Scott, John (Ayr) (Con)
Tosh, Mr Murray (South of Scotland) (Con)
Wallace, Ben (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Young, John (West of Scotland) (Con)

AGAINST

Baillie, Jackie (Dumbarton) (Lab)
Barrie, Scott (Dunfermline West) (Lab)
Boyack, Sarah (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
Brown, Robert (Glasgow) (LD)
Butler, Bill (Glasgow Anniesland) (Lab)
Canavan, Dennis (Falkirk West)
Chisholm, Malcolm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab)
Craigie, Cathie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab)
Curran, Ms Margaret (Glasgow Baillieston) (Lab)
Deacon, Susan (Edinburgh East and Musselburgh) (Lab)
Eadie, Helen (Dunfermline East) (Lab)
Ewing, Dr Winnie (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Ferguson, Patricia (Glasgow Maryhill) (Lab)
Fitzpatrick, Brian (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)
Gillon, Karen (Clydesdale) (Lab)
Godman, Trish (West Renfrewshire) (Lab)
Grant, Rhoda (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Gray, Iain (Edinburgh Pentlands) (Lab)
Harper, Robin (Lothians) (Green)
Henry, Hugh (Paisley South) (Lab)
Home Robertson, Mr John (East Lothian) (Lab)
Hughes, Janis (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab)
Jackson, Dr Sylvia (Stirling) (Lab)
Jackson, Gordon (Glasgow Govan) (Lab)
Jamieson, Cathy (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab)
Jenkins, Ian (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD)
Kerr, Mr Andy (East Kilbride) (Lab)
Lamont, Johann (Glasgow Pollok) (Lab)
Lyon, George (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
Macdonald, Lewis (Aberdeen Central) (Lab)
Macintosh, Mr Kenneth (Eastwood) (Lab)
MacKay, Angus (Edinburgh South) (Lab)
MacLean, Kate (Dundee West) (Lab)
Macmillan, Maureen (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Martin, Paul (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab)
McAveety, Mr Frank (Glasgow Shettleston) (Lab)
McCabe, Mr Tom (Hamilton South) (Lab)
McConnell, Mr Jack (Motherwell and Wishaw) (Lab)
McMahon, Mr Michael (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab)
McNeil, Mr Duncan (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab)
McNeill, Pauline (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab)
McNulty, Des (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab)
Muldoon, Bristow (Livingston) (Lab)
Mulligan, Mrs Mary (Linlithgow) (Lab)
Murray, Dr Elaine (Dumfries) (Lab)
Oldfather, Irene (Cunninghame South) (Lab)
Peacock, Peter (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Peattie, Cathy (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Radcliffe, Nora (Gordon) (LD)
Robson, Euan (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD)
Rumbles, Mr Mike (West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine) (LD)
Sheridan, Tommy (Glasgow) (SSP)
Simpson, Dr Richard (Ochil) (Lab)
Smith, Elaine (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab)
Smith, Mrs Margaret (Edinburgh West) (LD)
Stephen, Nicol (Aberdeen South) (LD)
Stone, Mr Jamie (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
Thomson, Elaine (Aberdeen North) (Lab)
Watson, Mike (Glasgow Cathcart) (Lab)
Whitefield, Karen (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab)
Wilson, Allan (Cunninghame North) (Lab)

ABSTENTIONS

Adam, Brian (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Campbell, Colin (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Crawford, Bruce (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Cunningham, Roseanna (Perth) (SNP)
Ewing, Fergus (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP)
Ewing, Mrs Margaret (Moray) (SNP)
Fabiani, Linda (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Gibson, Mr Kenneth (Glasgow) (SNP)
Ingram, Mr Adam (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Lochhead, Richard (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
MacAskill, Mr Kenny (Lothians) (SNP)
MacDonald, Ms Margo (Lothians) (SNP)
Marwick, Tricia (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Matheson, Michael (Central Scotland) (SNP)
McGugan, Irene (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
McLeod, Fiona (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Morgan, Alasdair (Galloway and Upper Nithsdale) (SNP)
Neil, Alex (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Paterson, Mr Gil (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Quinan, Mr Lloyd (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Reid, Mr George (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Robison, Shona (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Stevenson, Stewart (Banff and Buchan) (SNP)
Sturgeon, Nicola (Glasgow) (SNP)
Swinney, Mr John (North Tayside) (SNP)
Ullrich, Kay (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Welsh, Mr Andrew (Angus) (SNP)
Wilson, Andrew (Central Scotland) (SNP)

The Presiding Officer: The result of the division is: For 16, Against 61, Abstentions 28.

Amendment disagreed to.

The Presiding Officer: The third question is, that motion S1M-2245, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on Scottish Executive support for the voluntary sector, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

Members: No.

The Presiding Officer: There will be a division.

FOR

Aitken, Bill (Glasgow) (Con)
Baillie, Jackie (Dumbarton) (Lab)
Barrie, Scott (Dunfermline West) (Lab)
Boyack, Sarah (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
Brown, Robert (Glasgow) (LD)
Butler, Bill (Glasgow Anniesland) (Lab)
Canavan, Dennis (Falkirk West)
Chisholm, Malcolm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab)
Craigie, Cathie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab)
Curran, Ms Margaret (Glasgow Baillieston) (Lab)
Davidson, Mr David (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Deacon, Susan (Edinburgh East and Musselburgh) (Lab)
Douglas-Hamilton, Lord James (Lothians) (Con)
Eadie, Helen (Dunfermline East) (Lab)
Ferguson, Patricia (Glasgow Maryhill) (Lab)
Fitzpatrick, Brian (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)
Fraser, Murdo (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Gillon, Karen (Clydesdale) (Lab)
Godman, Trish (West Renfrewshire) (Lab)
Goldie, Miss Annabel (West of Scotland) (Con)
Grant, Rhoda (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Gray, Iain (Edinburgh Pentlands) (Lab)
Harding, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Harper, Robin (Lothians) (Green)
Henry, Hugh (Paisley South) (Lab)
Home Robertson, Mr John (East Lothian) (Lab)
Hughes, Janis (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab)
Jackson, Dr Sylvia (Stirling) (Lab)
Jackson, Gordon (Glasgow Govan) (Lab)
Jamieson, Cathy (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab)
Jenkins, Ian (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD)
Johnstone, Alex (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Kerr, Mr Andy (East Kilbride) (Lab)
Lamont, Johann (Glasgow Pollok) (Lab)
Lyon, George (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
Macdonald, Lewis (Aberdeen Central) (Lab)
Macintosh, Mr Kenneth (Eastwood) (Lab)
MacKay, Angus (Edinburgh South) (Lab)
MacLean, Kate (Dundee West) (Lab)
Macmillan, Maureen (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Martin, Paul (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab)
McAveety, Mr Frank (Glasgow Shettleston) (Lab)
McCabe, Mr Tom (Hamilton South) (Lab)
McConnell, Mr Jack (Motherwell and Wishaw) (Lab)
McGrigor, Mr Jamie (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
McIntosh, Mrs Lyndsay (Central Scotland) (Con)
McLetchie, David (Lothians) (Con)
McMahon, Mr Michael (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab)
McNeil, Mr Duncan (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab)
McNeill, Pauline (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab)
McNulty, Des (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab)
Monteith, Mr Brian (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Muldoon, Bristow (Livingston) (Lab)
Mulligan, Mrs Mary (Linlithgow) (Lab)
Mundell, David (South of Scotland) (Con)
Murray, Dr Elaine (Dumfries) (Lab)
Oldfather, Irene (Cunninghame South) (Lab)
Peacock, Peter (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Peattie, Cathy (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Radcliffe, Nora (Gordon) (LD)
Robson, Euan (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD)
Rumbles, Mr Mike (West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine) (LD)
Scott, John (Ayr) (Con)
Simpson, Dr Richard (Ochil) (Lab)
Smith, Elaine (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab)
Smith, Mrs Margaret (Edinburgh West) (LD)
Stephen, Nicol (Aberdeen South) (LD)
Stone, Mr Jamie (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
Thomson, Elaine (Aberdeen North) (Lab)
Tosh, Mr Murray (South of Scotland) (Con)
Wallace, Ben (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Watson, Mike (Glasgow Cathcart) (Lab)
Whitefield, Karen (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab)
Wilson, Allan (Cunninghame North) (Lab)
Young, John (West of Scotland) (Con)

AGAINST

Ewing, Dr Winnie (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)

ABSTENTIONS

Adam, Brian (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Campbell, Colin (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Crawford, Bruce (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Cunningham, Roseanna (Perth) (SNP)
Ewing, Fergus (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP)
Ewing, Mrs Margaret (Moray) (SNP)
Fabiani, Linda (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Gibson, Mr Kenneth (Glasgow) (SNP)
Ingram, Mr Adam (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Lochhead, Richard (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
MacAskill, Mr Kenny (Lothians) (SNP)
MacDonald, Ms Margo (Lothians) (SNP)
Marwick, Tricia (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Matheson, Michael (Central Scotland) (SNP)
McGugan, Irene (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
McLeod, Fiona (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Morgan, Alasdair (Galloway and Upper Nithsdale) (SNP)
Neil, Alex (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Paterson, Mr Gil (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Quinan, Mr Lloyd (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Reid, Mr George (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Robison, Shona (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Sheridan, Tommy (Glasgow) (SSP)
Stevenson, Stewart (Banff and Buchan) (SNP)
Sturgeon, Nicola (Glasgow) (SNP)
Swinney, Mr John (North Tayside) (SNP)
Ullrich, Kay (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Welsh, Mr Andrew (Angus) (SNP)
Wilson, Andrew (Central Scotland) (SNP)

The Presiding Officer: The result of the division is: For 75, Against 1, Abstentions 29.

Motion agreed to.

That the Parliament welcomes the Executive's recognition of the important role of the voluntary sector in Scottish society through the contribution it increasingly makes to promoting social justice, encouraging active citizenship and widening economic prosperity; endorses the progress made by the Executive in its commitment to working in partnership with the sector through the framework of the Scottish Compact, and welcomes the commitment demonstrated by the Executive through its increased resourcing of the sector.

The Presiding Officer: The fourth question is, that motion S1M-2238, in the name of Margaret Smith, on publication of the Scottish parliamentary ombudsman and health service ombudsman for Scotland's annual report, be agreed to.

Motion agreed to.

That the Parliament notes that the Scottish Parliamentary Ombudsman and Health Service Ombudsman for Scotland intends to lay his Annual Report for 2000-01 before the Parliament and orders the Clerk to publish the report.

The Presiding Officer: The fifth question is, that motion S1M-2255, in the name of Tom McCabe, on the designation of lead committees, be agreed to.

Motion agreed to.

That the Parliament agrees the following designations of Lead Committee—

the Justice 1 Committee to consider the Criminal Legal Aid (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2001 (SSI 2001/306);

the Justice 1 Committee to consider the Criminal Legal Aid (Fixed Payments) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2001 (SSI 2001/307);

the Justice 1 Committee to consider the Parole Board (Scotland) Rules 2001 (SSI 2001/315); and

the Local Government Committee to consider the Firemen's Pension Scheme (Pension Sharing on Divorce) (Scotland) Order 2001 (SSI 2001/310).

European Day of Languages

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): The final item today is the interesting members' business debate on motion S1M-2221, in the name of Irene Oldfather, on the European day of languages. I say bonsoir and au revoir to those who are not staying—[Interruption.] Order. Perhaps I should have said taisez-vous. Those who wish to take part should press their request-to-speak buttons now.

Motion debated,

That the Parliament welcomes European Day of Languages and the publication of Citizens of a Multilingual World by the Action Group on Languages, which makes recommendations on the future provision of language education in schools; recognises the vital role of language education in promoting cultural awareness; notes the positive response to the report, and looks forward to innovation in language teaching and an expansion of opportunities in primary schools.

17:10

Irene Oldfather (Cunninghame South) (Lab): C'est avec plaisir que je propose ce débat en partie en français. Aujourd'hui, c'est un moment important dans l'histoire du Parlement écossais. En fait, c'est une journée historique car, pour la première fois, nous avons un débat dans une langue autre que l'anglais, l'écossais ou le gaélique. Nous sommes membres du Parlement le plus jeune et le plus récent d'Europe. Donc, en ce jour de célébration des langues dans toute l'Europe, nous voulons laisser notre marque distinctive.

En mettant ce sujet à l'ordre du jour, nous signalons que notre jeune Parlement souhaite que notre nation soit un véritable acteur de l'héritage européen commun. Nous ne voulons pas être des simples observateurs.

Mr John Home Robertson (East Lothian) (Lab): On a point of order.

The Presiding Officer: In English?

Members: En français!

Mr Home Robertson: Signor Presidente, mi dispiace, ma io non capisco neanche una parola di questo discorso. [Laughter.]

The Presiding Officer: It has been agreed that those who speak in a foreign language will also translate in due course.

Irene Oldfather: Merci, Monsieur le Président. J'affirme cela car les langues sont plus qu'un simple moyen de communication. Elles représentent l'instrument de la compréhension et de la connaissance des cultures, le moyen d'encourager la diversité et la tolérance. Ce sont les thèmes sur lesquels l'Union européenne est fondée, et pour lesquels ce Parlement ne cesse de se battre.

L'idée d'une journée des langues, c'était d'encourager les citoyens de tout âge et de toute nationalité, à travers l'Europe, à reprendre l'étude des langues pour le plaisir. Ce discours en français était mon défi personnel.

Voilà! That was my challenge for languages day. [Applause.] Thank you very much. I will briefly summarise in English.

It is with pleasure that, partly in French, I am proposing this debate. Today is an important moment in the Scottish Parliament. In fact, it is an historic day because, for the first time, we are having a debate in a language other than English, Scots or Gaelic.

We are members of Europe's youngest and newest Parliament and therefore, on this day of European languages, we want to make our mark. In choosing this subject for debate, we are sending a message that our new Parliament wishes our nation to share our common European heritage. We do not want to be only observers. Languages are about more than communication: they are about understanding other cultures and encouraging diversity and tolerance—themes upon which the European Union was founded and to which this Parliament lays claim.

The idea of languages day was to encourage people of all ages and all nationalities across Europe to take a language challenge for fun. This speech in French was my personal challenge.

I acknowledge that I have taken up a bit of time with my language challenge, but I would like to take the opportunity to make a few brief points. As I have said, languages can be fun; but there is also a serious note to language development. In a single market, in which it is just as easy to place a call centre in Irvine as in Italy, there can be no doubt that language skills will be decisive factors in job and inward-investment markets. I believe that we, as politicians, have a duty and a responsibility to push forward the frontiers of language development so that Scottish children can compete on an equal basis with their European counterparts. In an increasingly mobile labour market, such skills are no longer luxuries but necessities.

"Citizens of a Multilingual World" makes a number of suggestions for improving language skills, including greater innovation in the teaching of languages. I fully endorse that. In North Ayrshire, we host the virtual school of modern languages, which is a joint initiative using videoconferencing, information technology and other technology. It is welcome and allows children to interact with their European counterparts in a modern way.

We must diversify the languages that we teach. I suspect that there will be a preponderance of French speaking today. It is important that we include other languages. I am prepared to take my own advice and try another language next year.

I am pleased to welcome to the gallery pupils from Kilwinning Academy, which is in my area. I am proud to say that this year, Kilwinning Academy offers classes in four languages: French, German, Italian and Spanish. The Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs will recall that he visited Kilwinning Academy earlier this year and I know that he will be delighted to hear of the further developments in the language curriculum. That is in no small measure due to the commitment of the head teacher and the modern languages staff.

We will all watch with interest the results of the immersion teaching pilot scheme in Aberdeen, which allows children to learn physical education, arts, expressive arts and drama in a foreign language. The fact is that teaching in that way makes sense. Too often in years gone by—and when I was at school I was taught this way—the whole modern language class was taken in English. A good modern language class should be taught for the most part in the language that is being learned.

It would be remiss of me not to mention that the age at which we start teaching languages is crucial to improved linguistic development. We have moved languages into the primary school curriculum, but there is a long way to go. In my area, we are fortunate to have some nursery classes in Spanish. In St Luke's Primary School in Kilwinning we are establishing the reputation of the borough for culture. I hope that Tom Shields will take careful note. The fact is that young children soak up information like sponges and are much less self-conscious in displaying their abilities than are older children, who are often shy about language learning.

As I said in my opening remarks, language is about more than just communication; it is the key to appreciating other cultures, raising our horizons and broadening our experiences, for it is upon the foundations of respect, understanding and tolerance that economic prosperity and peace will be built.

I conclude by saying that I look forward to the day when the children in our schools, who after all are tomorrow's tartan army, can cheer for Scotland and order a pie and a pint not just in one European language, but in several. Perhaps our football as well as our language prospects will be enhanced.

Je me suis bien amusée. J'attends avec plaisir les interventions des mes collègues. Je vous remercies.

I have enjoyed myself very much and I look forward to hearing my colleagues.

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Patricia Ferguson): Surprisingly, many members wish to speak in this evening's debate. If all members are to be called, I ask members to restrict their speeches to three minutes.

17:18

Mr George Reid (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP): Госпожа Президент, спасибо большое. Дорогие коллеги, дорогая Патриция: для меня большая честь говорить сегодня не по-английски, а по-русски. Вы не понимаете, что я говорю? У вас есть вопросы? Переводчика нет? Поэтому, я говорю по-английски.

I suppose that it is a bit odd to start in Russian, but it is a privilege to speak Russian in this chamber. I should say how I fell into it, because sometimes one falls into languages. I am of such an age that I was sent to Russia to protect people like you, Ms Ferguson, when you were in your pram, at a time when the Soviet hordes and those from other parts of eastern Europe may have been coming up Maryhill Road.

I did not use Russian much for 25 years, then I found myself in the Armenian earthquake zone. It is funny what sticks in one's mind. For example, "Руки вверх!" which is, "Get your hands up"; "Где ваш штаб?" which is, "Where are your headquarters?"; "Где ваша команда?" which is, "Where is your command headquarters?"; and "Говорите, или я буду стрелять," which is, "Speak, or I shoot." It was not quite so easy in times gone by to learn simpler phrases.

A little later, at a meeting between the Minister for Parliament and I and a Russian delegation in the royal apartments of Edinburgh Castle, I said, "Что бы вы хотели делать в Шотландии?" or, "What would you like to do in Scotland?" They said, "Мы хотим виски," or, "We want whisky." Then, there was the perevodchik—the interpreter—going off to the loo, and me being left to translate. I was told, "Скажите, господин Рид, моему другу Тому,"—which means, tell my friend, Tom"—"что Шотландия - четырехкнопочная демократия," Scotland is a four-button democracy." Tom McCabe, not surprisingly, asked what that meant. It meant that, on going to the Presiding Officer's desk, the President of the Duma had found three buttons and a zap button—which is unique to this Parliament—to switch members off. The President ended by saying, "Россия - более демократичная, чем Шотландия."—"Russia is a much more democratic society than Scotland these days."

Madame le Président, j'ai trouvé du travail durant les années 1980, mais j'ai du quitter l'Ecosse. C'était les années Thatcher, et il n'etait pas facile pour un ex-parlementaire du SNP de trouver du travail ici en Ecosse. J'ai trouvé du travail en tant que directeur des affaires publiques auprès de la Croix Rouge Internationale, à Genève. Dans la maison, il y avait cinq langues officielles: l'allemand, l'anglais, l'espagnol, le russe et l'arabe. En plus, on parlait, probablement, 40 ou 50 autres langues dans les couloirs. In the house where I worked in Geneva, 30 or 40 languages were spoken. One immediately finds oneself dans le bain—in the bath. One is submerged in languages. They have an osmotic effect on you—you pick them up in all quarters.

One begins to have different perceptions. Consider the words that we use for disability: we have the words "incapacity" and "handicap". The French have only "handicapé". That leads to great difficulties in European translation. Consider the Spanish word, "minusválidos". That is the old word for handicapped people and literally means "people of less value". Geneva is having difficulty working in the new word, "descapacitados".

I have two final thoughts. In the Europe of new languages, there is someone who sits in the chamber and asks to intervene on the Presiding Officer. If he were to say that in German would the effect be as satisfactory? "Passen Sie auf, Frau Präsidentin. Beeilen Sie sich! Es ist mein absolutes Recht zu sprechen!" I do not think that that would get too far. Perhaps it could be tried in Italian—"Signora Presidente. Sono solamente un povero ragazzo da Glasgow. Potrebbe aiutarmi?" or, "Please give me a shot, Madam President, I am just a poor guy from Glasgow and I would like so much your assistance." The important thing, in this bath, is to speak the language, to perceive the differences in culture and attitude that come from it, and above all, to enjoy it in a Europe that is not just multifaceted but multicultural.

Спасибо большое, Госпожа Президент, merci pour votre attention, et j'offre mes fйlicitations à Irene Oldfather pour le débat.

17:23

Mr Jamie McGrigor (Highlands and Islands) (Con): Je suis l'heureux père de deux jeunes filles, qui ont été élevées dans un environnement bilingue depuis leur plus jeune âge. J'ai pu ainsi constater moi-même les immenses avantages que cela représente. Cela leur a permis une plus grande ouverture d'esprit aux cultures différentes de la leur. Cela leur donne aussi une confiance en elles, ce qui est bien nécessaire chez les adolescentes, lorsqu'elles rencontrent les gens d'autres pays.

I start by declaring an interest in that I am the proud father of two teenage daughters who have been brought up in a bilingual climate from the earliest possible age. I have seen the enormous benefits at first hand. They possess a tremendous advantage in appreciating other cultures and in having extra confidence when meeting and making friends with people from other countries. That is why I congratulate Irene Oldfather on lodging this motion for debate and why I thoroughly agree with most of the aims set out in "Citizens of a Multilingual World".

I have always found it embarrassing that people visiting Scotland seldom receive the courtesy of being addressed in their native language, whereas when we go abroad we gaily expect those from other nations to understand English and are surprised and even indignant if they do not. That must often convey an impression of arrogance and bad manners to non-English speakers. The only way to stop that and to enable our citizens to comprehend a new range of cultures and histories is to start at the education level, where it matters.

One of our key industries is tourism. If we want to please customers from other countries, it would be a good start for future generations of Scottish tourism operators to have a basic command of the main European languages. This summer, I was asked to open the great glen raid at Corpach near Fort William. It was a regatta from west to east through the Caledonian canal and organised by a French company. The event was an enormous success and especially helpful to tourism in this year of foot-and-mouth.

For the event, I put on my most beautiful kilt and made a welcoming speech to 150 competitors, most of whom were French. I therefore spoke in French and told them that the Caledonian canal had been constructed to protect British shipping from French privateers. That seemed to amuse them. Afterwards, I received a letter from the company's director, telling me how delighted and surprised the assembled company had been to be addressed in its native tongue. The gesture was small, but valuable.

We should make Scots better linguists. We Conservatives think that the £50 million that the Labour party saved by scrapping the assisted places scheme should be used to bring in specialists to teach foreign languages in primary schools.

Labour's record is not good. It has used money that it said it would spend on cutting class sizes to help such bodies as Scottish Opera. I agree that Scottish Opera deserves support, but ministers should please bear it in mind that most operas are sung in foreign languages. Therefore, will the Scottish Executive please provide future Scottish generations with the ability to understand those languages better? Further, the Executive should fulfil its declared commitment to Gaelic by giving more encouragement to Gaelic-medium education.

17:26

Ian Jenkins (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD): I declare an interest. I have had a French mistress as a partner for more than 30 years.

Dr Richard Simpson (Ochil) (Lab): That lost something in the translation.

Ian Jenkins: Yes. I speak of my wife, who has taught French for all that time.

Yesterday, I was putting the bins out when I met a former colleague, who is a modern languages teacher. He had just had a German exchange group at his school and two of the teachers had stayed with him for about 10 days. When I went into my house and read the post, I found a request to sign a document for the local twinning association: it wants to obtain a lottery grant because it wants to explain local culture to visitors from Hendaye in the Basque country.

I pay tribute to modern languages teachers and people in twinning associations who have taken on the idea of spreading and sharing culture: language is at the heart of understanding other cultures and how people think. Language is an instrument of understanding. If ever the world needed instruments of understanding, it needs them now. People who have taken the time and trouble to help share cultures and spread their knowledge of other cultures are doing us all a service.

I welcome the day of languages and the year of languages. It is important that we should understand the value of those initiatives. As we stand back and consider the global position, we can see a problem with English spreading to the point at which it offers not only opportunity, but danger. It provides the opportunity for broader communications, ease of trade, business, travel and other matters, but when everyone shares something, there is a danger of blandness, uniformity and a lack of subtlety.

English is continually changing. The language is not set in stone. Many local dialects exist and there is international influence even on standard English. The language develops. We must not pretend that in linguistic terms we can escape the fate of King Canute if we try to stop change, development and the spread of English. However, it is vital that we should cherish and protect all languages—minority languages included—and recognise their importance in a world that would be impoverished if languages and the cultures that they represent were lost or damaged.

"Citizens of a Multilingual World" is an excellent report that sets out a rationale for the importance of including and promoting the teaching of modern languages in schools. I have no time to go into the details, but the arguments are substantial and well argued. Old assumptions about language teaching are brought into the modern context and much is made of the fact that Britain itself is now a multilingual society—Gaelic, Scots, Urdu and so on are mentioned. The case for multilingual provision in our schools, which Irene Oldfather mentioned, is argued and its authors regret the fact that French is perhaps squeezing out other languages as the second language of choice in the school system.

The arguments in the report are powerful, but practicalities tend to work against diversity, so we need to be careful. Irene Oldfather mentioned some examples of how it can be difficult to make diversity available unless we really work hard at it. Although I support the rationale behind the report in full, I would enter one or two caveats about the suggested way ahead. The proposals for the primary curriculum would involve substantial changes to initial teacher training. The McCrone settlement can make a difference to teachers who are already in the classroom, but the proposals for initial teacher training would take many years to work their way through. We must be careful that we do not assume that by saying that we approve of something it will be done straight away.

When language teaching was introduced into primary schools, the practicalities were not observed and there were difficulties with teachers shifting from one class to another. There was also the difficulty that if the teacher with language skills left the post, the school was left without someone who was trained for it. I worry about the practicalities of the proposals.

Having expressed those reservations, I would like to concentrate on the more positive aspects of the European day of languages. Like everyone else, I express the hope that practical difficulties can be overcome. The opportunities are many; the rewards are even greater.

17:32

Dr Richard Simpson (Ochil) (Lab): Confrères, je suis très content de participer dans cette discussion et j'offre mes félicitations à Irene Oldfather, qui est l'instigatrice de la motion. J'ai choisi le français pour mon discours aujourd'hui. L'Ecosse a une tradition ancienne d'alliance avec la France, même plus ancienne que notre alliance avec l'Angleterre, et le français est la langue étrangère la plus enseignée dans nos lycées.

Récemment j'ai assisté à un événement à l'Université de Stirling pour célébrer l'année des langues européennes. Notre ministre pour l'éducation, l'Europe et les affaires extérieures a fait la présentation. La moitié de son discours a été en français, mais il a avoué que, comme beaucoup d'entre nous, sa capacité et sa bonne volonté de parler les langues étrangères étaient, malheureusement, limitées. Il nous faut changer ces attitudes. Il nous faut moderniser nos méthodes pour enseigner les langues aux enfants.

Quand j'étais élève, on a appris les langues, d'habitude, par la répétition et par les devoirs couchés par écrit. Je devais apprendre le latin au lieu des langues modernes parce qu'autrefois, c'était obligatoire pour l'étude de la médicine. L'enseignement des langues étrangères aux universités était aussi très traditionnel.

Au cours de mon association avec l'Université de Heriot-Watt, il y a 20 ans nous avons fondé une école de traduction, qui n'était que la deuxième en Grande-Bretagne, et qui employait les méthodes les plus modernes.

Nous devons faire du progrès. Les petits enfants possèdent une grande aptitude pour apprendre les langues, et il faut leur donner les occasions d'acquérir ces habiletés. Nous devons préparer nos enfants écossais pour un monde qui est de plus en plus accessible et de plus en plus communicatif.

Je recommande la motion.

Colleagues, I begin by welcoming this debate and congratulating Irene Oldfather who lodged the motion.

I have chosen to make this speech in French.

Scotland has a great tradition of alliance with France that goes back even further than our junction with England.

I attended the launch recently of the celebration of the year of European languages by the Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs at the University of Stirling. His speech was in part in French but he admitted, as so many of us have to, that our ability and willingness to speak foreign languages is sadly limited. We must change these attitudes. My own experience was of learning French mainly by rote and written exercises. I had to learn Latin in preference to a second modern language because Latin was at that time a requirement for medicine.

When I was associated with Heriot-Watt University's court about 20 years ago, we established the school of translation, only the second in any British university at that time, which used modern methods of language teaching.

We must keep up with the times. Young children have a great capacity to learn new languages at an early age and we must provide them with opportunities to acquire those skills. We must prepare Scottish children for a global world that is becoming increasingly accessible and where communication is vital.

I commend the motion.

17:35

Dr Winnie Ewing (Highlands and Islands) (SNP): Ik ben heel tevreden dat wij vandaag deze belangrijke discussie over de kwestie van de talen van Europa hebben. Dutch is one of my hidden talents. I was going to marry a Dutchman once, but he told me that in his view a woman's place was in the kitchen. As members can imagine, I said "Tot ziens, meneer," or "Goodbye, sir," and that was that.

I studied Dutch at The Hague and I took German and Spanish at school—I can carry on not too badly in those two languages. I learned a bit of Italian in the free lessons in the European Parliament. As George Reid said, it is a case of total immersion. As Irene Oldfather will know, because she was there a lot, it is a great privilege to be surrounded by languages. It made it easy for us to try.

I was once in a group with Irishmen and Frenchmen. Every morning I was kissed by 15 Frenchmen, including three former Prime Ministers. It took quite a while every morning and, I may say, it did not happen to many other people. They used to try to make me say cheeky things. One of the assistants once made a philosophical statement: "Au bal des pompiers, c'est toujours les mêmes qui dansent"—meaning it is the politicians who always want to speak. That useful phrase keeps coming to mind. I tried my French out on the oldest member, Louise Weiss, a famous lady who was much decorated culturally and a filmmaker of great repute. She said, "Winnie, please do not speak French to me. I am over 80 and I cannot stand it." That was the honest answer about my French, which I did not study at school.

George Reid gave us tips. A good tip in the Gaelic language is a useful phrase that members must all learn: "Càit a bheil a' cheilidh?" which means "Where is the ceilidh?" If members know that they will get invited into the back rooms and all the places where the singing is.

I have been studying Gaelic for 20 years. I can read and write it and I have limited vocabulary. Gaelic speakers are sophisticated people. It is a philosophical language, which creates certain barriers if one approaches it from a knowledge of Europe. I was head of a group to do with minority languages in Europe, of which there are more than 30. They are too many to list but, apart from the famous ones such as Breton and Basque, they include Sardinian, Corsican, Andalucian and Valencian. Every one of those languages has a valuable literature and a culture with a unique way of expressing ideas. They are all part of our common culture and the loss of any one is a tragedy for us all. Some, like Cornish and Manx, have gone.

Along with John Hume, I was privileged to create a budget line in the European Parliament for minority languages. That has helped many practical things, such as the publication of books for children in the lesser-used languages and a Breton dictionary. A Shetlandic dictionary is even being considered. I introduced Erasmus when I chaired the Education Committee. The original idea of Erasmus was not only study in another university but an immersion course for a period before the student would go. It was watered down, though. It is up to individual partners to find their own solution. Some people get the immersion course before they study.

In the Borders, a roving teacher was employed to teach Scots. Speaking at a Burns supper in Luxembourg, he told a funny tale about teaching Scots officially to children who really spoke Scots. A wee boy put up his hand and said, "Please Sir, does oor real teacher ken whit you're daein?" That shows that some of us who speak Scots have an understanding of the language that is more passive than active. It is a pity that Scots could not be encouraged more.

It was quite wrong for Gaelic grannies such as mine to tell their grandchildren that Gaelic would hold you back. That was the old, stupid thing that was said, but it is now well-known that knowledge of two languages makes it much easier to learn a third and to be philosophical.

17:40

Maureen Macmillan (Highlands and Islands) (Lab): gratias te ago. mulier, quae Scotiam habitat, sum. linguam latinam loquor nec linguam patriae meae. eheu! o tempora! o mores!

I hope that there are no native Latin speakers listening, because I do not know what my case endings or pronunciation were like. I think that there was a Vice-President of America who was sending undercover agents to Latin America and asked whether any of them spoke Latin. Unfortunately, few people speak Latin, the language that I probably learned best at school, which gives members some idea of what education was like in my day. I do not speak my own native language, which, as a Highlander, would have been Gaelic, because it was thought to have been no use to me. However, I had Latin coming out of my ears, although it has not come out of my mouth for a long time. I wonder what John MacLean, my old headmaster, would think of my standing up in the Scottish Parliament and speaking in Latin.

I am embarrassed about what is on my MSP web page, because it says that I am fluent in French. It says that because, when I got the form that asked what languages I spoke, I ticked French because I had done it at school. Now everybody expects me to speak French very fluently indeed, whereas in fact, much like Chaucer's prioress who spoke French after the school of Stratford-atte-Bow, I speak it after the fashion of Oban and Argyll—not terribly well at all. That is a great embarrassment to me.

I was interested in what Irene Oldfather said about bilingualism in education and about French-medium education. The way to get children interested in foreign languages is to start them very young. In Scotland, we have been trying to do that for a long time with Gaelic-medium education. I have lodged a motion for a debate on Gaelic-medium education and the problems that it has, so I do not want to go into that in great detail now. Teaching through the medium of Gaelic obviously expands the language part of the brain, just as teaching through the medium of French does. Being bilingual is of tremendous use if one wants to learn a third or fourth language.

Of course, Gaelic is our other native culture. Scots and Gaelic are twins in Scotland, are of equal validity and should have support. Particularly in the Highland area, children who have Gaelic as a first language have to be supported through Gaelic-medium education.

Everybody ought to learn at least one Gaelic phrase in this year of European languages, because Gaelic is, after all, a European language too—a minority language, but a very important one for Scotland. So to finish off, I shall say something in French. Et bien, merci beaucoup pour entendre ces petits mots—thank you very much for listening to these wee words. Agus feasgar math, a h-uile duine—good evening, everybody, in Gaelic.

17:44

Mr Lloyd Quinan (West of Scotland) (SNP): Eskerrik asko lehendakaria. Irene Oldfather-i nire esker beroenak eman nahi nizkioke eztabaida hau ziurtatzeko. Kontuz ibili zer Euskara ez dela Espainera, Gaelikoa ez dela Ingelesera eta Galegoera Espainera ere ez dela.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I thank Irene Oldfather for securing this debate. "Kontuz" means beware. Beware, that Basque is not Spanish, that Gaelic is not English, and that Gallego is also not Spanish.

During the summer, I had a remarkable experience when I moved through what I thought was a single language zone. I discovered that I had moved through four language zones and the secondary language in those four zones was not the language that I expected it to be.

I am glad that we are having this debate and I hope that we can have a larger debate during the next year and a half or two years. The key point to remember is that there are many languages in Europe, but they are not necessarily the languages of the names of the states. Let us be careful. Kontuz.

17:45

Karen Gillon (Clydesdale) (Lab): I congratulate Irene Oldfather on securing the debate and on her excellent contribution—especially the part in French. I will not try to copy her efforts.

Language development is crucial to the success and achievement of our children and young people. As a young person, I learned three languages. My only memory of Latin is: "In pictura est Flavia. Flavia est puella parva." I think that means: "In the picture is Flavia. Flavia is a small girl." However, the second sentence could mean: "Flavia is a big girl." I am not sure—my memory does not stretch that far back.

In French, I can manage: "Bonjour. Je m'appelle Karen. J'ai 34 ans et j'habite à Carluke en Ecosse." Too often, that is all the French that those of us who have been taught the language can remember. I can also stretch to: "Une tasse de vin rouge, s'il vous plaît," which has come in handy on a number of occasions.

I also learned English. Some members would argue that I speak English as well as I speak French and Latin. [Laughter.] People from Jedburgh sometimes speak Jeddart rather than English.

I have just returned from Hareleeshill primary school in Larkhall in my constituency. There, I joined the pupils who were celebrating European languages day. I was embarrassed that I could not understand everything that primary 6 and primary 7 pupils were saying in French, which I studied to higher level. Their enthusiasm for the many songs and dances was tremendous. They even performed the tale of Goldilocks and the three bears in French—I know that because I recognised the three bears in the three beds. The children were excellent and seeing them was brilliant. They had no inhibitions about learning another language—they simply spoke it and enjoyed it. They were part of it.

Too often, people's inhibitions set in if they do not learn languages until they are 13 years old. Adolescents are a wee bit shy about what they are saying. They are comfortable writing things down, but they are not always confident speaking languages. That we have begun to teach languages in primary schools is important. The earlier that children learn other languages apart from their own the better.

I have enjoyed myself today. The debate has taught me much about how languages can be taught and about how children can enjoy learning them. We are progressing significantly and we need to continue with that progress. I hope that my wee boy has more success with modern languages than I did.

17:48

Colin Campbell (West of Scotland) (SNP): Wie geht's? Ça va? ¡Hola! ¿Qué tal? Ciamar a tha thu? Hali sha ma shatori? How do you do? How's it gaun?

In those few words, members have experienced my full knowledge of Spanish and Farsi—or Iranian. Ich habe zwei Semester Deutsch am Goethe-Institut in Glasgow studiert, aber ich war kein guter Student. I think that all members understand that—I was rubbish at German.

J'ai aussi étudié le français au lycée pendant six ans, et pendant un an à l'université. Malheureusement, en temps anciens, on ne parlait français ni au lycée, ni à l'université—which must be patently obvious to everyone listening. We did not speak it; we just read it.

As Ian Jenkins said, language is developing all the time. Sometimes we regret intrusions from other languages. I can appreciate the Académie française's concerns of some years ago, when it felt that Americanisms were taking over. It was possible to speak almost no French in a sentence such as, "Je m'habille—I dress—avec mes jockeys, mon t-shirt, mon pullover, mon jean et mes sneakers." Academics fussed over that, but lost.

Why should they have bothered? The big plate with Scots roast beef on it is an ashet, from the French "assiette". Our little fingers are pinkies, which comes from the Dutch "pink" and the rain stotting on the roof is from the Dutch "stotten". The kirk assembly hall that we are in is from the Dutch or German for church. Some members will go home to bungalows, which is Hindustani, and have a cup of char, which is also Hindustani.

If we are happy to take elements of other languages on board, we should give equal respect to the languages and cultures from which they come. However, respect is not enough—some languages dominate the world and others are at risk, but we must not acquiesce to linguistic imperialism or let minority languages languish and die through neglect.

Respect must be reinforced with resources to enable a variety of languages and cultures to flourish in Scotland—that means Scots in varying forms, Gaelic, English and the languages that have become well established by immigration. If we respect our languages, we respect the diverse cultures that compose the citizenry of Scotland. We in these islands are massively guilty of linguistic isolationism, which is exacerbated by the fact that English is an international tongue. We owe it to ourselves to master foreign languages.

Learning a language is vital. Last week I spoke to Ernest Benach, who was part of a Catalan delegation to the Scottish Parliament. I do not speak Catalan or Spanish and he did not speak English. I spoke to him in Paisley French and he replied in Catalan French—we understood each other.

More than anything, the world needs to be able to communicate effectively to improve understanding. The European day of languages is a celebration of human diversity and points the way ahead to effective international communication. As Winnie Ewing said in Dutch, tot ziens.

17:51

The Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs (Mr Jack McConnell): Madame la Présidente, je suis très heureux que la journée des langues européennes, une initiative de l'année des langues européenes, se marque par ce débat sur l'enseignement des langues en Ecosse, et avec une telle diversité de langues—une première pour le Parlement écossais.

Personnellement, j'ai fait de grands efforts pour améliorer mon français et j'en ai retiré beaucoup de satisfaction. Je deviens de plus en plus conscient de mon manque de compétence dans les langues, mais je fais de grands efforts pour y remédier. Donc, j'ai choisi de vous parler en français aujourd'hui.

Je suis heureux que d'autres personnes ont choisi d'utiliser une autre langue aujourd'hui. Nous habitons dans un monde où la communication devient de plus en plus rapide entre les citoyens de differents pays. Nous visitons les pays étrangers régulièrement, et les jeunes d'aujourd'hui travailleront dans les pays étrangers même plus souvent que nous. Pour eux, parler une langue étrangère, c'est plus qu'important—c'est essentiel. Je suis convaincu que l'apprentissage de langues étrangères est un élément essentiel dans l'expérience de chaque élève et que la maîtrise d'une langue étrangère est une compétence nécessaire pour la vie.

Je suis persuadé que tous nos jeunes écossais devraient avoir le droit d'apprendre une deuxième langue. C'est essentiel pour eux, pour nous et pour l'Ecosse. Ensemble, nous pouvons développer un système efficace d'apprentissage de langues pour nos jeunes, ce qui leur permettra de devenir, en effet, des citoyens d'un monde multilingue.

I have been waiting for that for nine months.

I am pleased that European languages day, which is a European year of languages initiative, is being marked by a debate on languages education in Scotland in such a linguistically diverse way—a first for the Scottish Parliament.

I have worked hard to improve my French and have enjoyed the experience very much. I am more and more aware of my lack of foreign language skills, but I am trying to improve, so I chose to speak in French today.

I am glad that others have also chosen to use another language today, because we live in a world where communication between citizens of different countries is becoming faster and faster. We visit foreign countries regularly. Today's youngsters will work in foreign countries more often. For them, speaking another language is more than important—it is vital. I am convinced that language learning is an essential element of a pupil's educational experience and that language ability is a valuable life skill. I believe that all our young people should have the right to learn a second language. That is essential for them, for us and for Scotland.

I thank Irene Oldfather for lodging the motion that we are debating today. I also thank those members who have contributed to the debate. I do not attend many members' business debates, but it has been fascinating to learn that Karen Gillon was once shy, that Ian Jenkins has a French mistress and that Winnie Ewing put a new interpretation on "The Flying Dutchman". It has been great to have this opportunity and I thank the Presiding Officer for agreeing to mark the European day of languages by allowing a choice of languages in the chamber.

If my old French teacher, Wilma Pirrie, could see me now she would probably die of shock. I would especially like to thank Jessica Princeton, who is in the gallery today. She has been tutoring me all year to get me to this stage and I am grateful to her for that. I took up the language challenge and I do not regret it. In the gallery, we also have John Mulgrew, who chaired the action group on languages. He is director of education at East Ayrshire Council and is with many pupils from that area. He and the action group did first-class work in putting together the report, "Citizens of a Multilingual World". I am grateful to them for their work and for being here today.

I believe that language skills open doors—they widen horizons and develop individuals. I want our record in Scotland's schools to improve. The Executive has today responded to the key elements of the action group report. We have backed the idea of an entitlement to experience a progressive, coherent and successful language education. We endorse that model and are determined to make it work. We will develop an information leaflet for parents and pupils, which will draw on the excellent rationale for language that was produced by the action group and will help to inform them about the new entitlement.

In recent years, funding for language education has been focused—I have to say successfully—on additional training for primary teachers, with little facility to fund innovative approaches to language learning and teaching. As of now, we are going to change the funding package to provide resources to local authorities.

Over the next three years, we will provide an additional £2.5 million to let local authorities be the innovators along with those who direct improved language education at a local level. That funding should be used to support the learning of all languages other than English; it should not be restricted to modern European languages. It should be used for Gaelic, Urdu and other languages for which there is a demand in Scotland's schools.

We have also responded to the report in saying that our review of initial teacher education will examine thoroughly ITE for language teachers and language training for primary teachers. Our work on continuing professional development will ensure that those elements—especially professional development for language teachers—are recognised and progressed.

A number of excellent examples of language education currently exist in Scotland's schools. I will highlight four of them. First, there is the work at the Shawlands Academy international language school. Secondly, there is the excellent, innovative partnership involving East Ayrshire Council, North Ayrshire Council and Argyll and Bute Council—some of the pupils and teachers that are involved in that are here today. Thirdly, there is the French partial immersion project in Aberdeen—that was one of the most fascinating classrooms I have been in anywhere in Scotland. Five-year olds were learning French almost as a first language, never mind as a second one. Fourthly, there is the teacher support project in Clackmannanshire, which I am sure Richard Simpson would endorse.

Those are all great initiatives and there are many more. Language learning in Scotland is entering a new era. It will be contemporary, responsive and appropriate for the needs of our young people in the 21st century.

Together we can develop an effective system of language education for our children, which will ensure that they can indeed become effective citizens of a multilingual world.

In other words, Presiding Officer, ensemble nous pouvons développer un système efficace d'apprentissage de langues pour nos jeunes, ce qui leur permettra de devenir, en effet, des citoyens d'un monde multilingue.

Meeting closed at 17:58.

Session 1 (2000)

Scottish Parliament
Official Report

Vol 04
No 11

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

CONTENTS

Wednesday 16 February 2000

Debates


TIME FOR REFLECTION

POINT OF ORDER

DRAFT CENSUS (SCOTLAND) ORDER 2000

Motions—[Mr McCabe]—agreed to.
Motion—[Tricia Marwick]—agreed to.
Motion—[Mr Jim Wallace]—moved.
Motion—[Irene McGugan]—moved.
Amendment—[Tommy Sheridan]—moved.

The Deputy First Minister and Minister for Justice (Mr Jim Wallace)
Irene McGugan (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Tommy Sheridan (Glasgow) (SSP)
Mr Brian Monteith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Kate MacLean (Dundee West) (Lab)
Tricia Marwick (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Nora Radcliffe (Gordon) (LD)
Des McNulty (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab)
Alex Johnstone (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Cathy Peattie (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Mr Gil Paterson (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Malcolm Chisholm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab)
Linda Fabiani (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Mr Michael McMahon (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab)
Dr Sylvia Jackson (Stirling) (Lab)
Brian Adam (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Johann Lamont (Glasgow Pollok) (Lab)
Alex Fergusson (South of Scotland) (Con)
Elaine Smith (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab)
Mrs Margaret Ewing (Moray) (SNP)
Euan Robson (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD)
Mr Jamie McGrigor (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Tommy Sheridan
Shona Robison (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
The Deputy Minister for Communities (Jackie Baillie)


DECISION TIME

BRITISH SIGN LANGUAGE

Motion—[Dr Winnie Ewing]—debated.
Dr Winnie Ewing (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Cathie Craigie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab)
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton (Lothians) (Con)
Mr John Munro (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD)
Ms Sandra White (Glasgow) (SNP)
Cathy Jamieson (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab)
Robert Brown (Glasgow) (LD)
The Deputy Minister for Communities (Jackie Baillie)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Scottish Parliament

Wednesday 16 February 2000

(Afternoon)

[THE PRESIDING OFFICER opened the meeting at 14:30]

Time for Reflection

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): To lead our time for reflection today, I welcome Judith O'Neill, who is a lay member of the Catholic Church.

Judith O'Neill: I quote:

"Ask and it will be given to you,
Seek and you shall find,
Knock and it will be opened to you.

For everyone who asks receives,
and he who seeks finds,
and to him who knocks, it will be opened."

Friends, we begin our time for reflection today with two brief parables that Jesus told his disciples. I read from chapter 15 of St Luke's gospel:

"What man of you, having a hundred sheep, if he has lost one of them, does not leave the ninety-nine in the wilderness, and go after the one which is lost until he finds it. And when he has found it, he lays it on his shoulder, rejoicing. And when he comes home, he calls together his friends and his neighbours, saying to them, 'Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep which was lost'.

Or what woman, having ten silver coins, if she loses one coin, does not light a lamp and sweep the house and seek diligently until she finds it? And when she has found it, she calls together her friends and neighbours, saying 'Rejoice with me, for I have found the coin which I had lost'."

Each of those little stories has the same very satisfying pattern. It begins with a loss—the loss of a farmer's valuable sheep and a woman's precious coin; perhaps it was a piece of her jewellery. Then the story moves on to the search: the farmer trudging over the fields and calling for his lost sheep, and the woman lighting a lamp and sweeping the floor for her lost coin. Then come the finding and the rejoicing, and the calling in of friends for a celebration, because that which was lost has been found again.

As we reflect on those two stories of losing, searching and finding, let us bring our prayers to God.

We pray first for all who suffer loss, especially those who come to us for help. They may come over loss of work, loss of house or land, loss of family and friends by bitter quarrels or by death or, worst of all, the loss of memory. Help us to enter into their sorrow, to bring them comfort, to join in their search, and to rejoice with them if what has been lost can be found again. For all those, dear God, we ask you to hear our prayers.

We pray, too, for all the men and women in Scotland who are ready to help those who suffer loss: for the members of this Parliament; for our ministers and priests; for our teachers and lawyers; for our doctors and nurses; for our social workers and housing officers; for the police and the mountain rescue service; for those who man our lifeboats; for those, such as the Samaritans, who answer our helplines; for loving families; and for faithful friends and good neighbours. For all those, dear God, we ask you to hear our prayers.

We end our reflection today by asking for God's blessing on ourselves and on all the work that is done in this house:

May the Lord bless us and keep us,
May the Lord make his face to shine upon us and be gracious unto us,
May the Lord lift up the light of his countenance upon us and give us peace.

Amen.

Point of Order

14:35

Dennis Canavan (Falkirk West): On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I thank you for your letter of response to my inquiry about how the agenda for parliamentary committees should be decided. Rule 12.3.1 of the standing orders states:

"A committee shall meet to consider such business on such days and at such times as it"—

the committee—

"may from time to time decide".

My understanding of the English language indicates to me that that means that it is the committee as a whole, rather than the convener alone, which decides the agenda of a committee meeting.

I should be grateful if you would be good enough to clarify the contents of your letter to me, in which you state:

"The only formal option available to a member seeking to influence the shape of an agenda would be to lodge a motion ahead of the previous meeting of the committee. This would need to be consistent with the Rules in Chapter 8 (e.g. Rule 8.2). However,"—

this is the important part of the letter—

"the convener does have the authority to decide which, if any, motions to take and in effect, therefore, controls the agenda."

My understanding of rule 8.2 is that it refers to motions for meetings of the Parliament. Surely the procedure for committees should be different, otherwise a convener can use his or her powers to stifle debate. I would, therefore, be grateful if you could arrange for the matter to be considered by the Procedures Committee.

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): I am perfectly happy to ask the Procedures Committee to have a look at the matter, but in general the standing orders as set out for the chamber apply equally to committees. It is for the conveners of committees to rule as I rule in the chamber.

I will be happy for the member to publish my correspondence—I think that members would rather see it than have it debated as a point of order. By all means allow the Procedures Committee to have a look at it, as well.

Draft Census (Scotland) Order 2000

14:37

The Minister for Parliament (Mr Tom McCabe): I move without notice,

That motion S1M-552 be taken at this meeting of the Parliament.

Motion agreed to.

Mr McCabe: I wish to move motion S1M-552 because the draft census order is somewhat unusual, in that it is subject to both affirmative and negative procedures. Suspension of standing orders will allow the debate to follow the normal pattern.

I move,

That the Parliament agrees to suspend Rule 8.6.1, Rule 10.7.1 and Rule 11.4.1 of the Standing Orders for the period of the debate on the Census (Scotland) Order 2000 on 16 February 2000.

Motion agreed to.

The Presiding Officer: We will now proceed to the debate on motion S1M-459.

Tricia Marwick (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP): On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I understand that motion S1M-519 in the name of Kate MacLean has been withdrawn.

The Presiding Officer: You have pre-empted me—I was about to inform members that Kate MacLean's motion has been withdrawn. In the interests of the chamber, I am happy to accept a motion without notice for a member to propose a similar motion. Is that what you are seeking to do?

Tricia Marwick: I move without notice,

That motion S1M-554 be taken at this meeting of the Parliament.

Motion agreed to.

The Presiding Officer: I will call Irene McGugan to move her motion in place of that of Kate MacLean at the appropriate time.

I now call Jim Wallace to move motion S1M-459.

14:39

The Deputy First Minister and Minister for Justice (Mr Jim Wallace): The 2001 census will be a landmark event, as it will be the first census of the new millennium and the first to be conducted under the auspices of the Scottish Parliament. Once every 10 years, the census provides us with an opportunity to collect information about every person resident in Scotland, which will enable policies to improve the social and economic condition of Scotland's people to be soundly based.

The draft Census (Scotland) Order 2000 sets out the Executive's proposals for the date of the next census, which it is proposed should be 29 April 2001.

The purpose of the order is to prescribe the date on which the census is to be taken, the persons by whom and with respect to whom the census returns are to be made and the particulars to be stated in those returns.

An Executive note explaining the draft order was tabled when the order was laid. Annexe A of that note comments fully on the articles and schedules.

Briefly, article 4 stipulates the persons with respect to whom the returns are to be made—essentially, all usual residents of a household. Visitors are not covered where they are staying on census night but are required to be included on a form for their usual address. There are special provisions for students and boarding school children at the parental home.

Article 5 stipulates the persons by whom the returns are to be made, both for private households and for communal establishments. Articles 4 and 5 should be read with schedule 1. Article 6, which stipulates the particulars that are to be supplied in different situations, should be read with schedules 2 and 3.

Providing that the census order is approved and, subsequently, formally laid, we will follow it up with further subordinate legislation in the spring, consisting of the draft census regulations, which, among other things, will specify the forms to be used in the census.

The procedures for dealing with the draft order are complex, as explained in the Executive note. I will say something about those procedures in a moment.

However, I will outline first how the Executive has approached the task of deciding what priority topics should be included in the census—I am sure that most of our debate today is likely to concentrate on that aspect of the draft order.

Our proposals for census topics have been drawn up after thorough and extensive consultation with users over a lengthy period that started back in 1996. There are three criteria for selecting topics: whether they meet the priority needs of census users in Scotland, particularly central Government, local government and the health service; whether acceptable and workable questions on priority topics can be devised; and whether the census, or an alternative method, is the best method of collecting the information required. Also, we have had to have regard to the overall length of the census form, taking into account the implications for user response and cost.

Since publication of the draft order on 10 January, almost all comment has focused on additional questions that particular groups wish to be included, notably religion, more information on ethnic group, language spoken in the home, the Scots language and income.

By way of contrast, one can observe that there has been little or no comment on the additional questions that we are proposing to ask this time, compared with 1991. I will rehearse those questions, which are on general health, provision of unpaid care, year of previous employment, size of work force at place of work, place of study and journey to place of study. Those new questions, along with income, are the expressed priorities of those who make most use of census data.

We have had to reject several topics that the main census users wanted to be included. For example, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities would have liked extra questions on sources of income, second and holiday homes, five-year migration patterns and the number of paid jobs held by individuals.

Reflecting the additional questions that we have included and a more user-friendly layout, the proposed census form for 2001 requires three pages per person and, with household questions, the standard five-person form will be 20 pages long, in comparison with a 12-page form in 1991, which catered for a household of up to six people.

Quite simply, we cannot keep adding questions to the census form without that having an adverse effect on response rates and, inevitably, costs. It is right to give priority to the topics that have commanded most support during an extensive consultation process.

I have said that it is important that the census form does not exceed three pages per individual, in addition to the household section of the form. First, the cost escalates sharply if we have to move beyond three pages. Secondly, and more important, the professional judgment not only of our own registrar general but of the other census offices in the United Kingdom is that there will be a significant adverse effect on the user-friendliness of the form and, therefore, on response rates, if that threshold is exceeded.

Mrs Margaret Ewing (Moray) (SNP): I am interested in the reference that has been made to escalating costs. For the benefit of everyone in the chamber, will the minister give us an indication of the costs that would result from expanding the census form?

Mr Wallace: I have received estimates that indicate that an extra page would cost an additional £600,000 to £1 million; the more pages were added, the more costs would increase.

That is why three pages per individual, taking around 10 minutes to complete, is proposed in all parts of the UK. I believe that that strikes the right balance between the interests of the form-filler in every household in the country and the needs of users for more information.

In deciding which questions to include in the census, we must also have regard to whether the census is the best way of collecting information on particular topics, compared with other approaches such as household surveys.

First, the census has the distinction of being a comprehensive survey of everyone in the country on a compulsory basis. However, it must be remembered that the census form is a self-completion form. As a consequence, it is something of a blunt instrument when dealing with complex issues or where there are problems of definition. Other methods of collecting information, such as sample surveys that allow follow-up questions, are more appropriate to topics where qualitative issues need to be explored in depth.

Secondly, the census is uniquely able to provide reliable, authoritative and comparable statistics at small-area level—at the level of local authority wards, for example. Indeed, data are often produced for smaller areas to permit users to create their own areas. If information is not needed at that very small geographical scale, the required data can often be collected more cost-effectively by means of sample surveys.

I refer now to the further additional questions that have been suggested by a number of people, the case for which has been made by the Equal Opportunities Committee.

I will deal first with the question on religion. It must be said that religion did not emerge as a priority of the main census users in Scotland—central and local government, and the health authorities. However, the Churches and other religious groups were broadly in favour of including a question. There has also been support from a number of academics, and a proposal to break down the Christianity category—which is not proposed in England and Wales.

I think it right that we gave a lot of weight to the views of the main census users, who did not see a religion question as a priority. However, we have been prepared to listen carefully to other views that have been put forward and to change our initial view where convincing reasons have been advanced. I acknowledge the strong feelings on the issue that have been expressed by the Equal Opportunities Committee, the Commission for Racial Equality and others. In particular, I acknowledge the force of the argument that users may not have given full weight to the developing agenda of equality-proofing and social inclusion. The main purpose of a religion question is to help prevent discrimination against minority religious groups as part of our wider social inclusion agenda. In the light of the arguments that have been made, the Executive has decided that a religion question should be asked in the census in Scotland, as in other parts of the UK.

Mr Kenneth Macintosh (Eastwood) (Lab): I thank the minister for his concession, which will be broadly welcomed by all religious groups. In my constituency, the Christian, Muslim and Jewish communities all broadly favour the inclusion of a question on religion. However, the Jewish community has some reservations. It feels that, because of the discrimination and intolerance that it has suffered in the past, many members of the Jewish community will not fill in the census form accurately. The community welcomes the chance to be consulted on the form that the question should take.

Mr Wallace: I assure Mr Macintosh that there will be consultation. I am sure that the Jewish community will want to make its views known.

The inclusion in the census of a question on religion will require a change in primary legislation, as we propose that penalties should not apply to those who refuse to answer the religion question, unlike other questions in the census. That may be of interest to Mr Macintosh and others, and mirrors what is proposed in other parts of the UK. I sincerely hope that members who have pressed for a religion question to be included in the census will help ensure that a census amendment bill completes its passage through the Parliament as speedily as possible, so that the timetable for the census is not placed in jeopardy and the extra costs can be contained.

Procedurally, we propose that the draft census order, which we commend to Parliament today, should be passed, because, pending the change to primary legislation, it is not possible to include a religion question in the order. Once the primary legislation is in place, we intend to bring forward an amended order and census regulations to include religion. Passing the draft order today will enable the date of the census to be fixed and will allow the process that authorises the registrar general to appoint census field staff to proceed without a delay.

We prefer a religion question that includes a broad breakdown of Christianity. We also favour making a distinction between the religion to which people regard themselves as belonging today and the religion in which people were brought up. The registrar general will make proposals available shortly. I refer now to ethnic group, a question on which is proposed in the draft order, along the lines of the successful question in the 1991 census. Representations have been made by the Equal Opportunities Committee, the Commission for Racial Equality and others that a more detailed breakdown of ethnic group would be useful in connection with equality-proofing and social inclusion policies.

The Executive has listened to those concerns and is prepared to consider an expansion of the ethnic group question in Scotland, subject to the overriding requirement that the census form should not exceed three pages per individual, or 20 pages in total. The registrar general will shortly be consulting interested parties, including specifically the Equal Opportunities Committee, on the form that the ethnic group question should take.

I hope that Parliament will recognise that we have been prepared to listen to concerns and to change our stance where convincing arguments have been advanced, despite the additional costs and complications to the census timetable. I have always argued that this should be a listening Government. This is an example of how the Scottish Parliament can and should work.

Mr Alex Salmond (Banff and Buchan) (SNP): Of course we welcome the concessions and believe that the minister is totally trustworthy. I wonder, however, when he decided to make the concessions and why they do not appear anywhere in the Executive motion that is before Parliament today.

Mr Wallace: That is rather obvious. The motion before Parliament today was lodged on 10 January, before the Equal Opportunities Committee had had an opportunity to consider the matter and to make its views known. I appeared before the Equal Opportunities Committee last week and got a clear steer on the committee's views. There have also been on-going discussions with members of the committee since then, as there have with others, such as the Commission for Racial Equality, who have made their views known. In the light of those discussions, I am able to give Parliament more information.

Mr Salmond: The minister, as he well knows, is perfectly capable of lodging an amendment, which would adjust the Executive's position. Usually undertakings given to Parliament are accompanied by some indication in the business bulletin, not just the minister's verbal assurances.

Mr Wallace: I am not sure whether Mr Salmond was listening. I made it clear that we cannot include anything in the order that relates to religion, because we do not have the necessary primary legislation, so it would not be competent to do so—hence the need to give an undertaking. The principal thing is that we want the order to be passed today so that the date can be fixed and the registrar general can start to take in hand some of the essential preparations. It would not have been competent to include any reference to religion in the order. I have given a commitment that primary legislation will be introduced shortly and that we will, thereafter, introduce an amended order.

I have indicated that we will consult on the form that the ethnicity question should take. There is a proposal to expand the ethnicity question, which would not require an amendment to the order. There are other proposals that would require an amendment to the order, which could be included at the same time as the amendment to introduce the religion question.

I do not want to pre-empt consultation on that, which is why there is no specific amendment today. However, Mr Salmond has my undertaking that we will consult on the form that the ethnic group question should take.

After equally careful thought, we have concluded that no useful purpose would be served by the inclusion of a question on language spoken in the home. In Scotland, the Commission for Racial Equality proposed that question to identify cases where a lack of ability in English could be a barrier to the effective uptake of services, including education. The case was also made on behalf of metropolitan authorities in England. However, tests show that it was not possible to collect the information that was required from a question about language that was spoken in the home. Census users were informed, in 1998, that the question had failed to offer an effective means of measuring ability in English, which had been put forward as the main requirement. It is significant that every other part of the United Kingdom has also concluded that such a question should be omitted.

We have also heard arguments for the inclusion of a question on the Scots language. The hard fact is that the term "Scots" means different things to different people. Research by the registrar general has demonstrated that responses to questions about the Scots language vary significantly according to the terminology that is used. According to the report in the Scottish Parliament information centre, when asked:

"Can you speak Scots or a dialect of Scots, e.g. Shetlandic,"—

and that might cause some controversy in Shetland—

"Glaswegian or Buchan?",

31 per cent of respondents answered yes, and 69 per cent answered no. To the simple question:

"Can you speak Scots or a dialect of Scots?",

33 per cent answered yes and 63 per cent answered no. However, when the words

"e.g. Doric, Lallans, Buchan"

were added to the question, 17 per cent answered yes and 83 per cent answered no.

The reliability of any statistics that were derived from a census question on that issue would therefore be somewhat suspect. That is quite different from the position of Gaelic, on which we are proposing to include questions, as there are no such problems concerning the definition of Gaelic.

Shona Robison (North-East Scotland) (SNP): Given those statements, will the minister explain why he lent his support to the campaign to include a question on the Scots language in the census?

Mr Wallace: I am better informed now. I have the information from the research that has been conducted, which shows how unreliable an answer to a question on the Scots language would be.

The fact that we have taken that view does not demean the importance of the Scots language in Scottish cultural life. We are providing financial support for the "Dictionary of the Older Scots Tongue", the Scottish National Dictionary Association, the Scottish Poetry Library and the Scots Language Resource Centre, which totals £135,000 in the present financial year.

Dorothy-Grace Elder (Glasgow) (SNP): Will the minister give way?

The Presiding Officer: The minister is winding up now.

Mr Wallace: In education, curriculum guidance advocates teaching a proper awareness and an appreciation of Scots by including Scots literature. It is clear that there is a commitment to the development of the Scots language, which does not require a census question to underline it.

Finally, I shall say a few words about the amendment in Mr Sheridan's name, on the subject of income. In contrast with religion, more detail on ethnic group, language in the home, and the Scots language, there was widespread and well-argued support from the main census users in central and local government for a census question on income. However, after careful consideration, and despite that widespread support and the strong case made by users, we have reluctantly come to the conclusion that the risks to the census as a whole from including a question on income would be unacceptable. There are also doubts about the quality of the data that would be obtained.

Tests that were carried out by the registrar general indicate that response rates to the census as a whole—not just to the income question— would fall by some three percentage points. That reflects a view that is held by many people, that a question on income in a compulsory census would be intrusive. That is a serious shortfall in relation to the overall underenumeration of some two percentage points that occurred in 1991.

Moreover, we know that the drop in response rates to the census as a whole would be considerably more in areas such as inner cities and areas of deprivation. Those are the very areas which policies that are based on census data are designed to help. Given the importance of the census, we have reluctantly concluded that we cannot afford to take the risk of an income question undermining the valuable information on other topics that we need to underpin our policies.

I can tell Mr Sheridan, and others whom I know are interested in the issue, that there are alternative sources. A report that was published by the census offices in September drew attention to the availability of small-area income data from the Department of Social Security, the scope for modelling income data, and the development of other sources such as Inland Revenue data, new survey data, new modelling techniques and private sector data. We intend to pursue that, with the objective of producing and disseminating data by the time the census outputs are available in 2002 and 2003.

I will not say too much about the procedural matters, Presiding Officer, as I am sure that under your careful guidance and that of your deputies we will steer our way through the process this afternoon.

The Executive's motion calls on the Parliament to approve the parts of the order that require affirmative resolution. That will enable the order to be made—with the advantages that I mentioned.

The changes that I have announced today will require an amendment order to be laid before the Parliament, to include a question on religion once the primary legislation has been passed, and also—depending on the outcome of consultation—to include a more detailed question on ethnic group.

We have consulted extensively, listened carefully and been prepared to be flexible where possible. I trust that our package of proposals, with the announcements that I have made today on religion and ethnic group, will command the support of the Parliament. On that basis, I commend the draft order to the Parliament.

I move,

That the Parliament approves the draft Census (Scotland) Order 2000 to the extent that it relates to the following particulars in Schedule 2—

(a) in item 1, the words "indicating whether an individual form is being completed by that member";

in item 2, the words "and relationship to the first person mentioned in the return, and, as the case may be, where there are 5 or less persons in the household, the relationship of each of the previous persons mentioned in the return and where there are 6 or more persons in the household, the relationship of the sixth and subsequent persons to the two previously mentioned persons in the return";

in item 6, the words "and if married whether first or subsequent subsisting marriage";

items 7, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17;

in item 18, the words "or was on a Government sponsored training scheme";

items 19, 27, 28, 29, 31, 32;

and items 1, 2 and 3 of Schedule 3 to the draft Order.

The Presiding Officer: As the minister explained, the procedure is complicated. I will call Irene McGugan to move her motion. As it is not identical to the one that has been withdrawn, I should be grateful if she read it out at the start of her speech. I have arranged for 50 copies of the motion to be available on the desk at the back of the chamber, if there is any doubt about what it contains.

After that, we will move to Tommy Sheridan's amendment S1M-459.1, which is an amendment to Jim Wallace's motion.

15:01

Irene McGugan (North-East Scotland) (SNP): On behalf of the Scottish National party, I move motion S1M-554, lodged in my name, which seeks to include a question on the Scots language in the 2001 census.

I move,

That the draft Census (Scotland) Order 2000, except to the extent that it is subject to approval by resolution of the Parliament, be not submitted to Her Majesty in Council, and call on the Scottish Executive to lay a revised draft Order which will include, within particulars to be stated in returns, in respect of any person, whether or not able to (a) understand (b) speak (c) read and (d) write Scots (including any local Scots speech form such as Buchan, Glasgow or Shetland dialects).

The Presiding Officer: Please proceed.

Irene McGugan: The motion of the Equal Opportunities Committee, which has been withdrawn, put together a package of measures to ensure the inclusion in the census of a question on religion and an enhanced question on ethnic groupings and language spoken at home, with a specific question on the Scots language. That was the unanimous position of the Equal Opportunities Committee; it was confirmed as recently as yesterday. Today, we have received a verbal assurance from the minister that he will include a question on religion and is willing to consult on the expansion of the questions on ethnicity.

That is not enough, as those concessions are not included in the motion on which we will vote today and they do not meet all the requirements of the original Equal Opportunities Committee motion. The minister is not willing to accept a question on language spoken at home and there is no mention of concessions in respect of the Scots language.

Members might ask why it is so important to have such a question in the census. Scots is recognised by the European Bureau for Lesser Used Languages as one of Europe's minority languages. It is time that it was acknowledged in Scotland.

Scots has a written history as far back as the 14th century and a literature that no other European minority language can rival. It was the official language of Scottish government until the adoption of English translations of the Bible at the reformation, and continued as the spoken language of all classes in the lowlands well into the 18th century.

The previous Scottish Parliament spoke Scots and had its official report written in Scots for about 100 years. It would be ironic if prejudice and ignorance meant that this new Scottish Parliament ignored the importance of the language. The important point is that, although the languages are closely related, Scots is not derived from English and it is not just a continuum of English—it is a language, not a dialect.

It should be a huge embarrassment to this Parliament that we have only a vague idea of the number of people who speak or understand Scots nowadays and in which areas the language is strongest. Languages cannot survive in the modern world if they are completely ignored by the education system and the media, as Scots largely is. It is not possible for local and national government to plan for educational and other provision without data on the language.

The only effective way of gathering the data nationally is through the census, as already happens for Gaelic. The information would help the planning of the promotion of Scots in schools, preparation of higher still material on Scots language and preparation of dictionaries and other reference works on Scots. It would assist in the development of all language-related industries, including broadcasting, media, publishing and academia. It would inform research into the language, its age and geographical profiles and its future prospects.

Census data could also assist in planning for cultural tourism in cases where information on local languages and culture could be a marketing tool. The inclusion of a question on Scots in the census is necessary not only for the details that it will reveal, but for the status that it will give to the mither tongue of at least 1.5 million Scots, if the Government's 1996 estimates are accurate.

Many of us were brought up in a country where the major institutions did not recognise our language and culture as valid. Surely our new Scottish democracy must recognise the culture and speech of the mass of the people if it is to approach the ideal of inclusivity, which is cherished by all of us who worked for the creation of the Parliament.

I am encouraged by the publication of the report on the national cultural strategy for Scotland consultation. Responses came from a wide range of individuals, independent organisations and associations, as well as from major national institutions and non-governmental organisations, local authorities and trade unions. The report stated:

"There is a need to recognise the Scots language, to measure its use, to celebrate and not denigrate it, and to enable it to take its place alongside Gaelic and English."

To borrow a story from the author and broadcaster Billy Kay, in the age of despotism at the end of the 18th century, Robert Burns was advised by the anglicised elite at the head of Scottish society not to write in Scots, as it would be dead within a few generations. Thankfully for world literature, Burns kent better, and continued to express in Scots poems and songs that have inspired millions. Who could ever forget the moment on 1 July last year when Sheena Wellington stood at the back of this chamber and sang "Is there for honest poverty", which so movingly opened our Parliament and established a new democracy for Scotland?

Scots is still alive and thriving, but now needs help and support, such as that given to Ulster Scots as part of the Good Friday agreement. The proposal is that Ulster Scots will receive £1 million, 75 per cent of which will come from the UK Government, a somewhat larger sum than it has ever given to the parent language, Scots. Currently, only £112,000 per year is given to support Scots, which is almost certainly the worst-funded minority language in Europe.

There may be difficulties in formulating a question to get meaningful data, but it is not impossible. Some teething problems are inevitable whenever any new question is added to the census. There was some confusion when Gaelic was first included in 1881; the wording of the question was subsequently refined. Nobody would suggest, however, that there should not have been a question on Gaelic, which has proved invaluable in planning Gaelic policy.

By opposing the question on Scots, this Parliament would effectively be opposing meaningful development of the Scots language, and denying equality to one of Scotland's indigenous languages.

Ian Jenkins (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD): I do not think that we can jump from one position to the other—because there is not a question in the census, that does not mean that the Parliament or the educational establishment does not wish to foster Scots. I agree that there should be investment in the language and that we should find out the relevant information, but I do not believe that the census is the only place for that.

Irene McGugan: We need a question in the census for exactly those reasons—to be able to have a base line of information from which to move forward to further investment, resourcing and support of the language.

I urge the minister to consider the terms of this motion sympathetically, as he and his colleagues have done in the past. In 1996, he tabled questions asking the then Secretary of State for Scotland whether he would make representation regarding the inclusion of a question relating to Scots in the 2001 census. Moreover, a few years ago, Henry McLeish wrote in a letter to a Scots language activist:

"I now write to confirm that I am quite happy to support moves to include a question on Scots in the 2001 Census."

Similarly, Sam Galbraith said:

"With such numbers involved, I have no hesitation in lending my support to your proposal."

Only last month, Nicol Stephen said:

"I have written to Jim Wallace about this issue and to request that a question about the Scots language is included in the Census."

I urge all members to give serious consideration to the motion.

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Patricia Ferguson): I call Tommy Sheridan to speak to and move amendment S1M-459.1. You have five minutes, Mr Sheridan.

15:10

Tommy Sheridan (Glasgow) (SSP): I welcome the Executive's decision to give way to Parliament on the questions on religion and ethnicity. It is a pity that it is not willing to give way on the question on Scots language. The Executive must learn, when it does give way, to give way with enough notice to avoid problems for committees such as the Equal Opportunities Committee, which conduct serious deliberations on these matters.

It is important that the Parliament has, in effect, flexed its muscles on those two key questions. It is also important that the Parliament learns how to flex its muscles to impose changes on the Executive. I hope that the Parliament will flex its muscles today, not just on the addition of a question on Scots language, but on the addition of a question on income.

Why a question on income? Mr Wallace said that the 2001 census, the first census of the new century, was a landmark occasion. It is clear from various reports that income inequality at the beginning of this new century is even wider than it was at the beginning of the previous century. We must have detailed analysis and statistics to allow us to examine income inequality.

Pressure has been brought to bear on the question of income by organisations too numerous to mention and people from all backgrounds, as the minister has recognised. Social researchers—including the Parliament's own researcher—are asking for that question to be included, arguing that it is essential for gathering reasonable data on income. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and other groups have also argued strongly for the inclusion of such a question.

There must be a question on income in the census so that we have a clear idea of income distribution in the Scottish population. There is no comprehensive survey of that at present, but such a comprehensive survey would be extremely valuable in relation to social and economic policy. It would allow us to get a clear picture of income distribution on a geographical basis.

There are, of course, indicators of inequalities in income and wealth in some areas. Indeed, a recent report in the newspaper that is given out free in Scotland's railway stations said that 125 millionaires live in Albert Drive, Pollokshields—the street in which Gordon Jackson, the member for Glasgow Govan, lives. That report is supposed to be reliable, but Gordon may disagree with it. Unfortunately, there are no millionaires in Pollok, but there you go.

We need comprehensive information on income distribution on a geographical basis. I would have thought that the Executive, which is trying to promote an anti-poverty policy that can be applied on an area-by-area basis, responding to deprivation in each area, would have been interested in having geographical data. If we are serious about policy change to solve Scotland's social problems, that information must be invaluable.

The Scottish Socialist party hopes soon to introduce a new proposal to abolish the deeply regressive and unpopular council tax and replace it with a Scottish service tax that would be based on ability to pay and incomes. However, there are no reliable sources of income data that would allow the serious analysis that is required. Some sources use car ownership as an indicator of income, as if someone who has a car necessarily has a better income than someone who does not. However, ownership of a car is a necessity for a person in a rural area, rather than the luxury that it might be for someone from another area. Car ownership is a crude and unreliable source of income data.

The Executive says that it will not accept the inclusion of the question on income as it is worried that the question will deter people from filling in the census forms. However, the evidence from the census test of 1997 showed that the inclusion of a question on income—

Mr Duncan McNeil (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab): Would Mr Sheridan accept that the income question might be difficult for some people to answer? Mr Sheridan, for instance, would have to detail his annual salary, which is way in excess of an MSP's. Would he answer the question truthfully or would he forget to fill in the form?

The Deputy Presiding Officer: You must wind up, Mr Sheridan.

Tommy Sheridan: It is always good to see Duncan McNeil rise to the occasion and ask a really useful question.

I was in the middle of explaining that, according to the census test of 1997, the response rate dropped from 57.4 per cent to 54.6 per cent. It seems that less than 3 per cent of people refused to fill in the form because of the question on income. I hope that the Executive will accept that a such a drop would be worth it in order to gain essential income data.

I suggest that the question could be asked simply and could involve the ticking of a box. There could be a box for £0 to £5,000 a week or a year, one for £5,000 to £10,000 and so on. Duncan McNeil could tick the box for £40,000, as he takes his full salary. I, on the other hand, take only £20,000. The question does not pose a problem in terms of difficulty.

The income question does not seem to pose a problem elsewhere. Other countries, such as the USA, Australia, New Zealand and many European Union countries, include questions on income that give them a reliable source of income data.

I ask the Parliament to flex its muscles today. This is not a great party political issue, even though Duncan McNeil tried to make it into one when he intervened. I hope that members will show some independence of spirit and vote for the inclusion of a question on income in the census.

I move amendment S1M-459.1, to insert at end:

"but calls upon the Scottish Executive to amend the Order to include an item on income bands".

15:18

Mr Brian Monteith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con): I intend to concentrate on the arguments for and against the inclusion of questions on religion and the Scots language in the census. I am opposed to the inclusion of questions on language spoken at home and on income, primarily because I do not think that they will provide credible information. Moreover, I believe that a question on income would result in a reduced completion rate, which is not a price worth paying.

I welcome the Executive's concession, in the face of mounting opposition, on the inclusion of a question on religion. I have that concession in writing. I must thank the many members—Dennis Canavan, members of the SNP and the Liberal Democrat party—who signed the motion that I lodged a number of weeks ago on the inclusion of a question on religion in the 2001 census. It is a pity that no member of the Labour party saw fit to sign it.

Many people, be they Protestants, like myself, or Roman Catholics, read with disbelief the loose and unfounded generalisations about the existence and scale of religious bigotry in Scotland that were levelled by James MacMillan last August. Although I do not doubt that his sentiments were sincerely held, they seemed to be founded on his experience in the 1960s and the 1970s and took little account of the more tolerant and open society that Scotland has become.

That is not to say that bigotry does not exist—I am sure that it still does—and we all agree that it needs to be tackled. However, the tone of Mr MacMillan's speech and the legs that it gathered when reported and discussed suggested that considerable divisions are still not being addressed. I found that many Roman Catholics with whom I discussed the speech disagreed with the argument.

It is my experience that, as a group, Roman Catholics are much more mobile and integrated in Scottish society than was suggested and that any exclusion from work or play because of religion is unusual. That is not to say that we should be complacent, which is why I support the inclusion of a question on religion in the census.

At the time of Mr MacMillan's speech, I remarked that comparative information would be useful for finding out trends in religious bigotry in Scottish society. With hindsight, I felt that it would have been useful if there had been a question on religion in 1951, 1961, 1971 and so on. That would have given us not just a snapshot of religious faith, but information on trends in religion in society, so that we could see whether there had been any changes. If there had been such a question a good 30 or 40 years ago, work and residential patterns would have provided clear evidence that Roman Catholic enclaves, and associated poverty and deprivation, existed in Scotland. As a result, we would have called upon whatever Government was in power to introduce policies to deal with those problems.

Such evidence would not have been surprising, because many Roman Catholics—particularly those from Ireland—had come in a state of poverty and with little education, to find work in Scotland. They were always going to encounter hostility, because many people looked on them as low-wage workers who might have been taking jobs away from others. Furthermore, skilled workers saw their privileges being threatened.

However, the employment market in a truly open society is blind to people's religion and colour, which will ensure that, in time, people will progress on their own merit and through their own endeavours. As a result, we should welcome the progress in Scottish society and encourage that progress for other religious and ethnic groups with the same journey to make.

Indeed, I would go so far as to say that the Roman Catholic community in Scotland is an example to other minority groups of what can be achieved. I support a question on religious faith in the census, because it will help us to establish that there has been a positive trend for Roman Catholics and other religious groups. Moreover, if evidence emerges of bigotry towards other religious groups, public policy can be introduced to mitigate its effects. I am confident that a question on religion in 2001 and 2011 will establish that we are an open, tolerant society and that, if work needs to be done, we will see the fruit of our labours by 2021.

As for the question on the Scots language, if anyone takes the trouble to examine the Tory submission to the consultation on the national cultural strategy, they will find that we favour artistic bodies giving far greater emphasis to Scots verse, literature and language. Our traditional heritage needs not only protection, but encouragement. I do not believe that that heritage is dead, or that it is preserved in aspic or alcohol; it is living, it will continue to flourish and it will blossom, especially in our schools, which is where policy should be directed.

However, it is wishful thinking to suggest that a question on Scots in the census will progress that policy. The simple difficulty lies with what people will understand by a question that asks them whether they speak Scots. Although I accept that Irene McGugan's motion attempts to address such a difficulty, it does not meet it, as the minister's evidence suggests.

Mrs Margaret Ewing: Mr Monteith is right to place emphasis on education in schools. Should there not also be emphasis on the Scots leid in our training colleges and Scots universities, where it is so often reduced to a very small part of the training programme for teachers?

Mr Monteith: I have no difficulty with what Mrs Ewing says, but there is a significant difference between schools providing an introduction and a background and colleges and universities providing something that people choose. I certainly support the view that Scots language should be more readily available. If a demand existed for Scots, I would support provision for it.

The Scots are linguistic masters. We can not only speak other languages, but alter our own language according to the context in which we speak or write. Scots have a wide range of linguistic registers, which we use to our advantage. A Scot working in the formal business context of Standard Life will deal with people from Scotland, people from the rest of Britain and people internationally. He or she will speak standard English, probably with a Scots accent. When our worker goes home, he or she will probably speak in a Scots form of that standard English with his or her spouse, children, neighbours and friends—a number of Scots words will permeate the conversation.

It has been my experience, particularly when I worked in London, that after a few drams or pints, a broader Scots shines through. It is not so much that Scots seek to suppress their language as that they seek to use their language in a way that will be understood by the people with whom they wish to communicate. That, and the fact that there are differences across Scotland as to what is believed to be Scots, would lead to a meaningless answer to any census question. The definition of Scots means too many things to too many people, so the question and its answer would be rendered valueless. A question on Scots might even harm the case for the promotion of the Scots language, as it might open Scots to ridicule.

As an example—

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Please begin to wind up.

Mr Monteith: If Hugh MacDiarmid had been asked what language he spoke, he would have had to answer, if he had been honest, English, yet Hugh MacDiarmid is famed for his use of Scots as an experimental poetic medium. We must find a fine balance in shaping our policy to promote the use of Scots. Census data might reveal the information that Irene McGugan wants, but if that information lacks credibility, it will not do its task. In concluding my speech in the debate on a census question on Scots language, I feel that it is only right that we say that we are gaunae no dae that.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: We now move to the open part of the debate. Members who wish to speak should press their request-to-speak buttons. Speeches will be limited to four minutes.

15:28

Kate MacLean (Dundee West) (Lab): I welcome the opportunity to debate the census, not least because, after today, I will not have to think or talk about the census for a while.

I want to explain why I withdrew so late the motion that I submitted on behalf of the Equal Opportunities Committee. The motion was submitted after we received written and oral evidence from a wide range of organisations. Although the committee came late to the process—I accept that it has been going on for a couple of years—we felt that if the Parliament wanted to demonstrate a genuine commitment to mainstreaming equality in every aspect of Scottish life, it had to address some glaring omissions in the census, even if that delayed or complicated the process or made it more expensive. It was obvious to us that previous users who were consulted had not fully recognised the emerging equality agenda and this Parliament's commitment to mainstreaming equality.

We felt that if the census did not gather detailed information on religion, ethnic background and language spoken in the home, including Scots, monitoring evidence on health, social disadvantage and discrimination could not be carried out effectively. Indeed, there was a strong argument that the inclusion of those questions in the census would validate the analysis of some of the other data and information gathered in the process.

Matters have moved at an alarming pace and the way in which they were handled was not ideal. However, we welcome the fact that the Executive has agreed to include a question on religion and has expressed willingness to expand the question on ethnicity. The Executive has agreed to consult the Equal Opportunities Committee, the Commission for Racial Equality and others on that question.

I am disappointed, as was the committee, that a question on language spoken at home is not to be included in the census. We felt that some valuable information could be gathered through such a question. However, I have sought assurances from the Deputy Minister for Communities, Jackie Baillie, regarding the inclusion of a question in the boosted household survey. I hope that she will address that more fully in her summing-up. Perhaps she will indicate whether the Equal Opportunities Committee will be consulted on that. Clearly, we would like to put forward the points that were made in the evidence that we received.

Given the change in the Executive's position and assurances from Jackie Baillie on the household survey, the majority of the Equal Opportunities Committee felt that there was no point in continuing to press for concessions. That was not the unanimous view of the committee. I accept that the time scale has made matters difficult for committee members and that had the Scottish National party not been able to lodge a motion today, it might have been left in a difficult position.

I welcome the fact that the Executive has agreed to change its position. I hope that the debate will concentrate not on how we have arrived at this point, but on what we have achieved. It bodes well for the Parliament that the people of Scotland can see how the committees and the Executive work together. It is a major step forward for equal opportunities and I hope that the debate will positively reflect that.

15:32

Tricia Marwick (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP): Towards the end of the 18th century, John Rickman, clerk to the House of Commons, outlined 12 reasons for conducting a census. He said that the intimate knowledge of any country must form the rational basis of legislation and diplomacy. He also said that a census would encourage the social sciences to flourish. We can discount some of his other reasons for a census, such as planning the corn needs of the population, but I commend another of his reasons to the Government. He said:

"In a time when many fear the dissatisfaction of the people, doing a census would improve Government's image, as setting out to promote a public good."

We will see whether the census has that effect on the popularity of this Government. Somehow I doubt it.

A memorandum from the Scottish Executive, dated 1 February, states

"The 2001 Census, the first to be held under the auspices of the Scottish Parliament, offers a unique opportunity to collect information which can shape the policies aimed at improving social and economic conditions in Scotland."

We are all agreed about the need for the census. Where we have differed is on the kind of questions that need to be asked.

The census is a unique document. It will be pored over by researchers, local authorities, central Government and health service providers for the next 10 years. The census is also a historical document that will provide a snapshot of the Scottish people at the beginning of the third millennium. That is why we must ensure that we include the proper questions in the census. We need questions that will reflect the ethnic, religious and social diversity of Scotland. I urge members to support the SNP motion on Scots, which was so eloquently presented by Irene McGugan.

I welcome the Pauline conversion of the Minister for Justice to some of the concerns expressed by the Equal Opportunities Committee about the type of questions to be asked in the census. Many organisations and individuals made representations, such as the Commission for Racial Equality, leading academics and researchers and the Medical Research Council. For several years, all those organisations have made representations to the minister and to the registrar general.

The Minister for Justice failed to listen, just as he failed to listen to the concerns expressed by the Equal Opportunities Committee from early January. Only last week he met the committee and said that there would be no questions on religion, on income, on languages spoken at home or on Scots. There was no question of him doing anything that would meet the concerns of the committee. He said that it was too difficult, it would make the form longer, the census was not the best tool and there was little demand from service users. There was plenty of demand from service users for an income question, but he ignored that.

Michael McMahon said that Jim Wallace's reasoning was bizarre. He was right; it was bizarre. Now he has brought the same motion here today but he has said that he will concede a question on religion and will consider a more detailed breakdown of ethnicity. Of course, that is not new information. Mr Wallace's conversion was widely trailed in the press at the weekend. He now accepts the arguments not because he is persuaded by those arguments but because the motion on behalf of the Equal Opportunities Committee was finding back-bench support and there was a risk that the motion would be defeated.

Euan Robson (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD) rose—

Tricia Marwick: Sorry, I am almost at the end.

Since when would a motion from a parliamentary committee represent a defeat? What happened to new politics?

I welcome Mr Wallace's remarks today. I urge him to follow through on the assurances he has given today. The SNP will give every assistance in ensuring that the primary legislation needed to allow the question on religion to be put receives a speedy passage.

15:37

Nora Radcliffe (Gordon) (LD): I welcome the fact that the Executive has responded to representations made directly to it and to the Equal Opportunities Committee's arguments, and I especially welcome that it has acknowledged that more weight should be given to working for equality for all people in Scotland by a variety of means. I am glad that it has agreed to include a question on religion and to expand the ethnicity question.

On the Scots language question, my head hears the difficulties but my heart responded to Irene McGugan's speech. I dinna ken fit tae dee—heid or hert.

I want to highlight a slightly different view of events from Tricia Marwick's. While what could be called the mechanics of the discussions leading to this debate have been less than satisfactory, we should not lose sight of the fact that the Parliament has been working in the way that the consultative steering group envisaged, with a committee of the Parliament sticking to its guns and having a demonstrable effect on the Executive, leading to a better conclusion.

15:38

Des McNulty (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab): Like colleagues, I welcome the change of view announced by the Deputy First Minister on questions on religion and ethnicity. As he said, it reflects a listening Parliament. However, some of the listening could have taken place a little earlier and with a bit more sensitivity. There may not have been an overwhelming demand from all census users in Scotland for questions on religion and ethnicity, but both Glasgow City Council and Dundee City Council, with high concentrations of ethnic minority populations, had called for those questions.

My main interest is in the income question. The Deputy First Minister indicated that there was a large demand from census users for that and that his decision not to include it was because of practical problems, particularly the impact on the response rate. It is perhaps helpful to explore some of the arguments for an income question and on the practicalities.

As somebody with a social science background, I am conscious of the fact that most people using the census would find an income question useful for two main reasons. First, it would substantially expand the volume of knowledge about income, which is not available from other sources. Secondly, and equally important, is the extent to which an income question can validate other kinds of information from other questions. For example, cross-tabulations could be done between income and health effects, household factors and so on. The census potentially is an extraordinarily useful tool for gathering information that is linked closely to the Government's agenda. If we are involved in a social justice agenda, the census can be used in a practical way as a tool to identify targets and measure progress.

There is a legitimate concern about response rates. The minister referred to the tests that have been done. I am not sure that I accept all those arguments because, in some ways, the response rate that one gets for tests will be different from the response rates that there will be for a census with its legal support. However, I accept that there are question marks over the validity of the income data that might be obtained from the kinds of questions that it is possible to include in the census at this late stage.

If we do not accept an income question at this stage for this census, my plea is that there is a strong argument for looking at the issue again. I would not like the gathering of income information in future censuses to be lost from sight. Such a question is used in the United States of America, where there is great suspicion of Government, and it gets a 98-odd per cent return on its census. The USA does not acquire information from a single income question; the census is designed around gathering income information alongside other information.

This issue is not just about adding an income question. We need to think strategically about the kinds of information that the Government wants to get out of the census, how that information can be best used to inform our decisions and how we ensure that Government, as well as others with an interest, can operate with the greatest effectiveness. Early in the considerations of what will go into the next census, the Deputy First Minister should return to how questions on income can be incorporated into the census.

I have been assured by the Deputy First Minister that he is going to look into other sources of income information. I am grateful to him for that. It is important that we examine carefully income information, because there are problems at the present time of the under-reporting of poverty in some areas of Scotland due to the way in which existing data are collected. I have raised a number of issues with the Deputy First Minister. I will examine carefully how the minister brings forward the promises that he has given on developing other sources of income information, so that we can address the blind spots in the current data.

15:43

Alex Johnstone (North-East Scotland) (Con): I am not entirely sure what happened at the start of this debate, but the ground changed, and we found ourselves with a different motion and a number of concessions from the Deputy First Minister. However, there are issues that I would like to address concerning the omission of certain parts of the census order, which brings me to the Scots language.

An issue such as this is one on which some of us have to speak from the heart rather than from the head. I am one of those people who was born and brought up in a farming community in rural north-east Scotland. I was brought up to speak the Scots language as my first language, and had to learn to speak English when I went to school. One of the greatest linguistic divides than can be found in Scotland is evident if one goes to a primary school class and examines the difference between the language spoken by pupils in the classroom and the language that they speak in the playground. For that reason, my heart will be with the Scots language, probably for evermore. I canna see me changin ma wey o thinkin.

The consequence is that we find ourselves in the position that we do today, with a motion to annul the census order on the issue of the Scots language. It is with great regret that I have to inform Irene McGugan that I will not be supporting her, in spite of the fact that I signed her earlier motion on this issue. It is essential that the census order progresses. The changes that have been made to it to alleviate some of the problems that people had are a great step forward. Because of the promises that have been made, I will be supporting the census order.

Today, for the first time, we have had the opportunity to discuss the Scots language, its importance and significance to this Parliament, and, more important, the significance of this Parliament to the Scots language. We need to address those points and to find new ways of doing so. I commend Irene McGugan for giving the Parliament this opportunity, and for having the courage to discuss the Scots language at the highest level in the Parliament. I offer her my support to continue the promotion of the Scots language in this Parliament.

15:46

Cathy Peattie (Falkirk East) (Lab): I believe that the Scots language is alive and enjoying new confidence in our country. It is alive in songs, stories and poems. Our bairns are speaking Scots in our schools and communities. Words are passed down from grandparents and parents in an oral tradition that finds us using words that were used years ago. My involvement in promoting Scots in the community has been based on a knowledge that people feel more confident if they are encouraged to speak in their own tongue. It is vital that people should be encouraged to use their mither tongue.

However, I have some concerns about the census question. Why? My experience from working in a number of communities on issues such as Scots is that if people are asked whether they speak Scots, they normally say no. This morning, when I was thinking about this debate, I was reminded of an interview that I heard on Scottish Television some time ago. The reporter was out on the street speaking to people in Aberdeen because Aberdeen University was starting up a unit to study the Doric. People were being asked what they thought about it. I cannot do an Aberdeen accent, and I am no even gaunae try, but one young man said in the broadest accent that I have ever heard, "Naebody speaks that any langer here."

It is important that we continue this debate, because the Parliament should continue to look at Scottish language. I want to thank Irene McGugan. We hear that, in the cultural strategy, Scots language issues are being flagged up. We need to promote the language. The fact that the promotion of Ulster Scots is funded much more than the promotion of Scots should be noted.

My fear about the census is that if the question is not clear, and people do not understand it, we will not get a fair reflection of the number of people who speak Scots. I fear for the language and for the promotion of it that has come so far. Unless I can be convinced that the question is one that people would answer clearly, I will not support including it in the census.

15:49

Mr Gil Paterson (Central Scotland) (SNP): Is it not a sad day when we come to a place called the Scottish Parliament to argue that the Scottish Government should agree to have a question on the Scots language in the census? How ungracious of the minister to accept two recommendations out of three from the Equal Opportunities Committee. The one that he cannot swallow—the one that he has rejected—is on the Scots language. What a slap in the face to the vast majority of people who use Scots as their normal everyday way of talking. What is the minister actually saying to them? Is he saying, "Speak properly"? Or is he saying that the people are second class?

A common argument against the promotion of Scots, and it has been used frequently today, is that different words are used in different parts of Scotland but mean the same thing. Of course they do. What is strange about that? There is nothing strange about that. Every language has different local forms, but no one would dare to argue that that makes the language less legitimate.

Take Switzerland, with four different official languages: French, German, Italian and Romansch. When I was in Switzerland, I asked about the diverse nature of the languages, to be told that the people in the next valley spoke a different language to the German that was used in the location that I was in. To my surprise, the other language used in the next valley was not French, Italian or Romansch, just another form of German. The Swiss are proud to be multilingual.

What about English? Are we saying that people in Cornwall speak in the same way and use the same words and phrases as people in Durham? Of course they do not, but they have a standard English.

I am sure that members will bear witness to the fact that many of our people, when being interviewed on television or radio, often are less fluid. Many are slow and pick their words carefully, sometimes coming over as uncomfortable—a bit like I am today—with the situation or, even worse, as lacking in confidence about what they are saying. That can be witnessed just as often when an interview is being carried out in English, but the person being interviewed normally speaks another language. They are the same as natural Scots speakers, who are simply translating their own language into English before speaking.

However, I would go further and say that Scots speakers are bilingual. How many here can speak another language? A few, I suppose. Of those who can, how many can read and write it? Fewer still, I expect. That is not a strange phenomenon; it is simply that people have picked up a language but have never been taught to read or write it. The majority of Scots speakers speak Scots from the day they can speak, but are never taught to read or write a single word of it.

In Scotland, an insidious campaign was mounted more than 100 years ago—it seems as if it is still working today—to kill off the Scottish tongue altogether. It did not work; it stayed with the people, if not in the schools.

It is not that long ago that Gaelic was derided and frowned upon. However, after a great fight for recognition, it is getting over its trauma. The Scots language has endured the same treatment, having been under attack from a frame of mind that stigmatises it, piling on it large doses of social prejudice. The Parliament is supposed to be committed to a programme of social inclusion. Surely that should include the Scots language.

Until we correct the barriers, hurdles and downright hostility to the people's language—the language of the streets and of homes and workplaces—it will be treated as the ultimate Scottish cringe by those who look to some other place for their vision and their culture.

It would be nothing short of a joke or a farce for this place to call itself the Scottish Parliament, while sending out a message that it is okay to humiliate the Scottish people by not recognising their right to speak their own tongue. Ur we no aw Jock Tamson's bairns, and should we no be treated like that?

15:53

Malcolm Chisholm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab): In terms of its subject matter, this is not the most important debate that we have had since 6 May, but in terms of the processes and founding principles of the Parliament, it is the most significant moment yet.

Before 6 May, we talked about a new politics, in which parties would relate differently to each other. We talked about an unprecedented new role for the committees in the Parliament and about a direct line, through the committees and in other ways, from people outside the Parliament into policy making. In a small way, we have seen that working for us in the census discussions that we have had. It may not yet be all power to the committees, but it is some power. This is a significant moment.

It is also the debate in which we heard a minister saying:

"I am better informed now."

I hope that we will hear that again; indeed, from back benchers as well.

It has been a debate in which the minister, who last week reported quite correctly that users did not see a religion question as a priority, said that users did not give full weight to equality proofing, thus taking on board the concerns of the Equal Opportunities Committee and acknowledging one of the founding principles of the Parliament, which is of course equal opportunities.

The reality is that people's view of the world shapes the data that they seek. Often, they do not recognise the relevance of information until they have it. Providing that information is the role of bodies such as the Commission for Racial Equality. Much of its work has been in persuading institutions at all levels in society that they must collect and use such information as an essential tool in the work of uncovering and eliminating possible discrimination and of understanding the needs of particular groups, the impact of institutions' practices on those groups and the policies that are required to overcome inequalities and patterns of social exclusion. We should be grateful to the CRE, one of the most important bodies that came to give evidence to the Equal Opportunities Committee. It reflected the views of black and ethnic people in wider society.

I welcome the minister's announcements on the inclusion in the census of a question on religion, on the broadening of ethnic categories in the census and on the pursuit of the language issue through a household survey. I was not, initially, totally persuaded about that, but I have listened to the minister and I have had further discussions with lobby groups today.

There seems to be a view that the household survey is an appropriate vehicle for the language issue. That is because, first, there are complications in the language question—various speakers have referred to those complications. Secondly, the reliability of the household survey on the matter of language will be greater than on certain other issues such as religion, in which there is a reactivity factor that results from the sensitivity of the question.

Mrs Margaret Ewing: I am grateful to Mr Chisholm for giving way.

It seems that he is arguing, in the context of the Scots language, for a divide-and-rule attitude. I was raised in the Borders, where all my ancestors were herdsmen or orramen. I moved to Moray and people asked how I coped with the Doric, but I had no problem with it. Does Mr Chisholm appreciate that language the length and breadth of our country is very translatable?

Malcolm Chisholm: I was going to conclude by asking for assurances from Jackie Baillie that the Scots language will be assessed via the household survey. In view of some of the points that have been made about definitions, that is probably the appropriate way to carry that forward. I also seek assurances from Jackie Baillie on the size of the samples in the household survey, and a commitment to act on the findings.

15:57

Linda Fabiani (Central Scotland) (SNP): I wish to speak on an issue that was originally proposed for inclusion in the census form by the Equal Opportunities Committee. That proposal has been withdrawn as it was refused by the Executive. It was on the question about the language that is spoken in the home.

If it is accepted that Government—central and local—has a continuing need for data on the size and characteristics of the population, we should use this opportunity of agreeing the content of the 2001 census form to best inform it of the diversity and needs of those who live in our country. That would enable policy to be informed, services to be planned and resources to be distributed according to need.

In 1991, a question on ethnic grouping was included in the census for the first time. The data that were provided on ethnic groups have enabled public authorities to take account of the needs of different ethnic groups in service planning and delivery. In our evolving society, enhanced categorisation—as detailed today—is welcome.

To the benefit of our society, Scotland has, through the years, become home to various ethnic groups. Imminent changes to immigration and asylum legislation mean that Scotland is likely to welcome more new residents—an estimated 6,000 before the census data are taken. According to current figures, the majority of those people will become bona fide residents. It is important that support agencies and public services have adequate information to service the needs of those residents.

The ability to communicate is a basic necessity. Consider the case of asylum seekers. They are not only socially excluded by the stigma of using vouchers for food until a decision is made on their cases, there is also the possibility that they will be unable to communicate if no translator can be supplied. Agencies have already expressed concerns about the difficulties of support services when translation services are limited, for example for speakers of Turkish Kurdish, Maghrebi Arabic and Pushtun.

The census should be forward looking. With rises in the general population, the role of language as an identifying factor is likely to increase over the next 10 years. Challenging social exclusion must involve uncovering issues that interested agencies do not yet fully understand. In terms of information gathering, why not use the most comprehensive survey—the census for 2001—as the baseline and then build upon the information given? Output from census information would inform a national strategy on interpreting and translating.

No effective equivalent is available from survey information, as any survey is, by definition, undertaken on the basis of a sample and therefore can provide only supplemental information. It cannot replace the value of the census. That applies also to any proposed household survey question on language spoken in the home, whatever size the sample. The census is one of the main ways of ensuring that fundamental human rights are protected, by ensuring that the rights of minorities are strengthened and that there is proper legal, social and cultural integration of immigrants and ethnic minorities.

I must mention the Scots language, which my colleagues have discussed already. Of course Scots should be included as a defined language in the census. After all, as Irene McGugan said, Scots is recognised by the European Bureau of Lesser Used Languages as one of Europe's minority languages, and it would be ridiculous if Scotland's own Parliament did not recognise it as such.

Surely Scotland would benefit from a national strategy on monitoring that addresses the historic lack of data on ethnic minority communities and that, at last, defines Scots as a significant language of Scotland. I ask the minister to reconsider his position on a question on language spoken in the home, and I ask members to support the SNP motion.

16:02

Mr Michael McMahon (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab): The importance of the national census for 2001 cannot be understated. The results will ensure that our decision makers and service providers have the tools they need to develop new strategies and, in some cases, to assess the impact of existing policies well into the new century.

The reason for a regular census is to reflect the changing status of the population and to update the statistical record on which the Government, the business community and others rely heavily. If we accept that census data must be updated regularly to provide a dynamic view of society, we must consider the nature of the information gathered by it.

On 10 January, the Deputy First Minister said:

"This will be a landmark census - the first to be carried out under the Scottish Parliament and the first in the new millennium. We have taken decisions on which questions to include and which questions to leave out following extensive consultation."

That, he might have thought, was that.

However, in this new form of government, which we now embrace and which continues to develop, it is possible, through our committee structures, to expand the debate and to include new material for consideration by ministers. I am pleased that ministers have shown strength not only by listening to the Equal Opportunities Committee but by adopting a number of the committee's views and recommendations—however late they came to that position. The term "listening government" may be scoffed at by cynics and opponents, but I am grateful for that example of what a listening Executive can bring to this chamber and to the legislation that we will develop on behalf of the people of Scotland.

I believe that it is the wish of the majority of MSPs to include in the census additional questions on religion and ethnic group, which I am pleased have been accepted. Today, given the time constraints, it is not possible to make detailed, individual arguments for all the additional questions that were, I believe, dealt with adequately by the Equal Opportunities Committee during its recent meeting with the Deputy First Minister.

It is clear to me and, indeed, a large number of leading academics, that information gained from the questions on religion and ethnic background could provide the basis for accurate research into religious bigotry and racism in Scottish society. On the labour market, for example, the public could be reassured that we are indeed a tolerant society, depending on the census findings. However, if it is shown that discrimination does exist, policies can be targeted specifically at the areas identified.

I make no apologies for asking that those questions be included in the draft order, as I believe that we must confront the truth, whether good or bad, and provide each of our citizens with confidence, in the knowledge that we will tackle the difficult issues, that we care and that we listen to them.

I welcome the decision of the minister and the Executive. More particularly, I welcome the creation of a more dynamic census, in which the information gathered will be of greater benefit than ever before. I remain committed to having all the additional questions that we have heard discussed today included in the census at some point in the future, although I am pragmatic enough to recognise that the concessions that the Executive has made represent real progress for all concerned. I commend the Executive and my colleagues on the Equal Opportunities Committee on playing their part in arriving at this sensible conclusion.

16:06

Dr Sylvia Jackson (Stirling) (Lab): Like many members, I welcome the Equal Opportunities Committee's input into today's debate.

I would like to talk about the additional question on income. The issue has not yet been resolved. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities briefing paper was most useful in identifying key issues, as was the Scottish Parliament information centre paper. Stirling Council also sent in information that has been useful when considering the income data question. In its letter, Stirling Council said:

"We depend on Census data to provide detailed social, economic and demographic data for small areas, which is not available from other sources. Census information currently informs the planning and delivery of many of our local services and policies."

The COSLA briefing outlined a number of questions and gave some answers to why a question on income should be included. First, it highlighted the uses the data on income would be put to. They include informing work on social inclusion, more accurate targeting of resources to areas of poverty and need, providing a direct measure of deprivation, and providing a direct measure of poverty. Stirling Council's list is very similar and provides an interesting account of how the inclusion of an income question would affect different projects in the area.

Secondly, the data would be useful for informing a range of policy and planning issues that deal with the resource allocation of social inclusion. The social inclusion agenda is at the heart of our programme for government and we hold it dear. For that reason, I support what Des McNulty said: we should not lose track of these data. I know that Jim Wallace has already given us an indication of how he may collect the data. I would like to be kept informed of what is happening, as Stirling Council is very concerned about this issue.

Another reason that has been given for the inclusion of an income question in the census is that there is no other source of income data at the small area level. The SPICe document notes that there are serious drawbacks in using the Department of Social Security material. It states:

"Most significantly, benefit receipt is not related precisely to income—not all of those whose income entitles them to a benefit actually claim it, and some people on low incomes are disqualified from benefit because of their savings. Moreover, benefit data does not allow the cross-tabulation with other social, demographic and social variables which the census provides."

Des McNulty also raised that last point.

Quite a few arguments have been made against the inclusion of an income question. I take on board the fact that it would lengthen the questionnaire and have a negative impact on the response rate. Tommy Sheridan has already mentioned the 3 per cent fall in the response rate that results from there being such a question, but there is a feeling that the advantages of including the question—or getting the data via some other measure—would outweigh the disadvantages. It seems that there are good arguments for having a question on income, although I accept that there are real fears about the response rate if it is included and about getting back unreliable evidence.

We need to address the issue of income data. As Tommy Sheridan said, we should look to the USA and to our European partners. Social inclusion is at the heart of our agenda and must not be left out. This is the first census that the Scottish Parliament has been involved in drawing up, which—as Jim Wallace said—is a landmark event. There has been healthy discussion of the issues. I hope that the issue of income data will be taken forward.

16:10

Brian Adam (North-East Scotland) (SNP): Fit is so wrang wi wantin to speir as part o the census aboot foo much money we mak and fit wye we speak at hame. I cannae see oniethin wrang wi that. I havenae heard onie argument today that persuades me itherwise.

I am quite happy to speak in Scots, but I know that the Presiding Officer will rule me oot o order if I do much mair.

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Mr George Reid): Not in the least.

Brian Adam: I have not heard any argument whatever to suggest that Scots is not a language that is used. It is the wye I wid speak at hame. I am quite happy to dae that. It is how I relate. There is nothing wrong with putting a question on it in the census.

The minister's arguments were rather spurious. He says that it is okay to ask aboot language in the household survey, but it is nae okay to ask aboot it in the census. I would have thought that the problems that are associated with asking a question about income and speech in the census would almost certainly be the same for the household survey.

The argument about the famous 3 per cent attrition rate is also rather spurious. When the figure is as small as that, how confident can we be about the statistics? As I have a small amount of scientific training, I know that we should not look at the bald figure. The figure is not 3 per cent, but 3 cent plus or minus something.

Aw o us who are politicians—hopefully there are one or two of us in the chamber—will be well aware of the margins for error in polls. For survey samples, the figure is plus or minus 3 per cent. The only evidence we have is that we might lose 3 per cent of respondents as a consequence of including the question. I am concerned about the accuracy of that figure. How accurate is it? I hae grave doots aboot it.

If it is okay to make concessions on religion—to say that the question will not be compulsory and that people will not be fined if they do not fill it in—why can we not do the same for the income question? At the end of the day, whatever people put on that piece of paper—whether it is four, five or 20 pages long—we hope that they will put the true answers. If people will be discouraged from completing the census because they do not want others to know their income, we should make the same concession as was made on the religion question. If we are to have a question on religion—I am delighted that we are—extensive consultation with all religious groups is essential. In particular, we must be careful to find out how many people regard themselves as active practitioners of the religion with which they associate themselves, and how many are more loose adherents to the various faiths.

I am delighted to support Irene McGugan's motion and Tommy Sheridan's amendment. I am disappointed that, although he has moved some way towards consensus, the minister has not felt it possible to move all the way. I hope that we may persuade him to do so later in the afternoon.

16:15

Johann Lamont (Glasgow Pollok) (Lab): I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate. I would like to point out that there are concerns in the Equal Opportunities Committee about language in the home, and I hope that we will receive assurances on that issue. It is not necessarily helpful to collapse together our commitment to the Scots language and our commitment to Scotland and to the census. People are coming to a balanced judgment on those issues.

I welcome the shift that the Executive has made, although I have some concerns about the fact that this could not be done in a more straightforward way, by informing the committee at a stage when it would not have created the difficulties that it did for the SNP. A recognition by the minister that he has got it wrong is a sign of strength, not an admission of weakness.

I want to put on record my thanks to all those in the Equal Opportunities Committee who worked together, not on the basis of party interests but genuinely to co-operate when they could make a difference. We must recognise, on today's evidence, that our committee structure can enhance the work of the Parliament. Committees are not a threat; equally, they are not an opportunity, in macho parlance, to square up to the Executive or take the Executive on. They are a means for us to make better policy, as they allow back benchers—and, more important, groups from outside Parliament, using the committees as a vehicle—to influence policy. Committees are not, therefore, an opposing power in the Parliament; they have a key enabling role. I would rather have less discussion in the language of victory, defeat and entrenched positions, and more of the listening that we have had in this debate on the census.

There have clearly been difficulties with procedure. It is important that we do not dwell on them, but learn from them. The first problem seems to be that the census was perceived as something neutral—a practical issue, rather than a political one. However, in reality, very few decisions—as any excluded group would tell us—are neutral. Organisations that have appeared before the Equal Opportunities Committee have, time and again, stressed the importance of compiling data that will improve services.

The main defence against including the questions on religion and ethnicity is that no one asked for it, but that is self-evidently not the case. It depends on who is asked and what is asked. If we had asked policy makers, 15 years ago, how best to reduce unemployment, how many would have suggested extending child care? Very few, as they would all have been men. We must think about who we are talking to. As the Commission for Racial Equality says, we need to understand that

"Challenging exclusion must involve uncovering issues that agencies do not yet fully understand."

The argument is, of course, circular. Groups are colour-blind and do not seek information on ethnicity, so information on ethnicity is not required. Mainstreaming breaks that circle.

The religious question plays an important part in defining one's identity, which is significant in itself. I recall, as a school teacher a few years ago, asking a child to fill in a form in which they had to describe their religion. I asked the child whether to put down Christian. "No," they answered, "I am a Protestant." That says something about identity, if not about that child's grasp of religious denominations.

In the black and ethnic minority community in particular, religious observations have service implications. I know a young woman whose parents would regard themselves as being of ethnic Asian origin—from Pakistan. She would describe herself as Scottish, but also as a Muslim. That has an impact on service provision in schools.

The census offers an opportunity that is too important to miss. We must grasp the lessons on mainstreaming that the debate has exposed and seek assurances on the important role of the equality unit. For example, did the equality unit discuss the emerging differences of opinion on the census? Was it asked for its view? We need to be reassured about the perspective of individual departments. It is deeply ironic that the census—which seeks to give a picture of our whole society—should expose the possible weaknesses in our departments' procedure for equality proofing. We must emphasise the importance of maximising effective consultation with outside groups. Equality issues must be addressed in all our mainstreaming.

We must resist the temptation to divide the world into areas in which equality matters or does not matter. Equality matters in everything we discuss and it should be at the front of our minds. We must remember the powerful messages of inclusiveness that have emerged during the census debate. We must recognise that we are a white legislature and that we have a chance to take the first step to challenge that. The first step is to listen to what the black and ethnic minority communities and groups are saying. In the shift that we have seen today in the Executive, and in making the decision to include the questions on religion and ethnicity, we have given ourselves the opportunity to understand our multi-ethnic and multicultural society better. We should, therefore, be better able to serve its needs.

16:20

Alex Fergusson (South of Scotland) (Con): I will discuss two of the issues that have been spoken about a lot today. First, the Scots language and, secondly, income brackets.

During the early days of this Parliament, many of us who were relatively new to the world of representative politics were carried away with the enthusiasm that was engendered and the desire to be involved in anything and everything that came our way. There was no end of invitations to join this society or that association. I found that it took a great deal of willpower to reject the many while prioritising the few that would be most pertinent or relevant to my own position.

It was with some trepidation that I put my name forward, in those early days, to take part in the Holyrood poetry link scheme, whereby MSPs would be linked to a local poet. It was some time before I looked up my contact, who turned out to be the official writer in residence in Dumfries and Galloway, one Liz Niven. I can say that I am extremely glad that I took that step. Although I have lived in the south-west of Scotland all my life, Liz has given me her view on more than one issue, not least of which is the importance of the Scots language and the frequency of its everyday use among people in Dumfries and Galloway. Liz Niven's first poem since our linkage is a work entitled "Tis The Saddest Thing", which is a poem in the memory of the crew of the Solway Harvester, so recently returned for burial to their home villages.

Members will not be surprised to know that I am neither a poet nor a critic, but I know something good when I hear it. This poem is a moving, apt and permanent part of what will be the legacy of that terrible tragedy. It is all the more poignant in that it is written in the Scots tongue, which is the principal reason why I am not going to recite it, but it gives a powerful indication of the importance of the regional dialects that are spoken throughout Scotland.

I am persuaded by that contact with Liz, and by many other representations that I have received, that recognition of the prevalence of these dialects would be helpful and, in the wake of the establishment of our new Parliament, would enrich and underpin our cultural roots and our linguistic heritage.

A question on incomes is an altogether different problem, although I understand some of the arguments of those who feel that it should be included. Again I refer to Dumfries and Galloway, which was neglected in the recent £21.5 million handout for areas of special deprivation. If previous allocation criteria had been adhered to, some £600,000 would have been granted to the region. I must say that Dumfries and Galloway Council is keen that a question of this sort should be included in the census.

Rural areas, no matter how idyllic, also have areas of intense deprivation. Some of the lowest wage earning statistics and some of the travel-to-work areas with the highest unemployment are to be found, regrettably, in the south-west of Scotland. Although a question on income might help to highlight that, I am persuaded by other arguments. First, people are more inclined to exaggerate their answers, both upwards and downwards, to questions of this type. Secondly, many people are reluctant to fill in this type of question, which leads to a higher rate of non-return. Thirdly, and possibly most important, the income of an individual is a matter for them and them alone, and not for any further state interference.

Tommy Sheridan: Will Alex Fergusson respond to the question that is often raised with me by the low-income groups in society, particularly those applying for income support. Why do they have to subject themselves to a sometimes very degrading means test? He seems to be arguing that those with higher incomes should not be encouraged to answer such questions.

Alex Fergusson: That is not what I am suggesting. I am suggesting that all people have difficulty filling in responses to these questions accurately. The Deputy First Minister and Minister for Justice showed us evidence to that effect, so including the question would not do the census any favours.

Although I have great sympathy with many of the aspirations of Irene McGugan's motion, in common with many other members who have spoken today I cannot vote for any motion that would—in effect—temporarily annul the census order and delay it unduly. However, I am sorry that the Executive could not take a broader view on some of the issues that the Equal Opportunities Committee has raised—particularly dialect. I hope that it will do so for a future census.

16:24

Elaine Smith (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab): Like other members, I am pleased to be taking part in this debate. I am delighted that the Equal Opportunities Committee, of which I am a member, has made a significant impact on the information that will be requested by the census next year. By its action, the Executive has shown that the Parliament and its committees have a significant role in shaping its decision making.

I am grateful if the Executive has listened—even if it has been at the 11th hour—to the concerns of the Equal Opportunities Committee and others on the need for information on religion and for expanded information on ethnicity.

There have been requests for the inclusion of additional questions on other topics, particularly income, language spoken at home and the Scots language. It has not been possible to meet those requests this time. I, like others, hope that some of those matters can be addressed by the Executive by other means. I ask the Deputy Minister for Communities, in her summing-up, to comment on those matters, and on the language question in particular.

There is no doubt that the information gathered from the census will be used to shape the future of all aspects of Scottish life, most importantly in the provision of public services. It is in that context that the Equal Opportunities Committee pursued an approach of mainstreaming equalities for the census content. How can we expect service providers to take account of minority needs in their forward planning if we are unable to provide them with the information that highlights the necessity to do so?

As much as the debate surrounding the inclusion of a question about language remains, there is also a technical debate surrounding the ability of some of our people to understand and complete the census form, for language and other reasons. That is an issue that I would wish the Executive to address from a practical perspective. There could be a helpline, for example, or the assistance of voluntary groups could be enlisted. I would expect such action to help increase census return rates.

I hope that all members agree that the changes in the census content that have been agreed will give a broader picture of Scotland's needs and the needs of its people in the 21st century. I hope that we, as Scotland's representatives, can effectively target resources to meet needs and to help ensure equality for all.

16:27

Mrs Margaret Ewing (Moray) (SNP): I recognise that we are moving close to the winding-up speeches, so I will try to be brief.

I, like many other members, welcome the concession being made by the Labour-Liberal Executive on religion and ethnicity questions. Those are important for recognising our changing society, and the move will be widely welcomed.

I want to concentrate on amendment S1M-459.1, on income. People often wonder whether a question on income is a real intrusion into liberty. I regard it as an important aspect of planning in this new century.

It may come as a surprise to many people in the chamber that the "New Earnings Survey 1998" showed that the average gross weekly earnings in Moray are the lowest in the whole of Scotland. People do not associate rural areas with such poverty and tend to think that we are dealing with an issue that relates solely to conurbations. Information such as this has huge implications for social inclusion, community planning, community safety and resource allocation—all words that trip so easily off the lips of ministers. We are not, however, to give our local authorities, who need much support, the information they need to ensure that they can deliver the services our people deserve.

Finally, I want to say a few words about the Scots language and the motion Irene McGugan moved so effectively, which has been ably supported by my colleagues in the SNP. I remember reading English language and literature at the University of Glasgow as a very young student in the 1960s—perhaps further back than I care to remember. Elements of philology and the development of language were included in our courses.

In a class of approximately 100 students, I seemed to be the only person who understood any Scots words. I do not know whether my fellow students were overcome with shyness, but I understood automatically such phrases as sneck the yett, and could answer all the questions put by the smartypants young lecturer. At the end of the lecture, he asked me, "Where do you come from?" I found that a strange question.

The fact that the lecturer asked me that question because I could understand lots of words in the Scots language indicated that he thought of the language as being compartmelised, I mean compartmentalised—I could probably say it better in Scots—into certain parts of the country. It is not. The language translates itself throughout the length and breadth of the land. I heard Cathy Peattie saying that someone at the University of Aberdeen had said that, in the Grampian region, naebody spicks that language. Nora Radcliffe, Winnie and I could take her to Keith to hear how that language is translated.

It is important, as Brian Adam so adequately showed, to give a message to the people of Scotland that the Scots language is not an entertainment. It is not something for Hogmanay, "Scotland the What?" or "Rab C Nesbitt"; it is a vibrant part of our society and we will do everything to support it. Over many years in politics, I have heard endless promises about surveys, which seem to come to naught. I have heard endless commitments about money being given to the language. Our real commitment could be given by including a question on Scots language in the 2001 census form.

16:32

Euan Robson (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD): This has been an interesting debate. There is a clear need for a census. To base public policy on information that is 10 years old is to risk that policy's irrelevance, or even worse. A local example that comes to mind is the problems of the Scottish Borders economy. Some of the figures that we were consulting on, to cast policy for the future to get ourselves out of difficulties, were so out of date that we wondered about their validity.

We heard John Rickman's argument that

"The intimate knowledge of any country must form the rational basis of legislation and diplomacy."

How true that is. Another of his propositions is perhaps more questionable today than it was in 1841—his view that

"A government anxious to increase total 'felicity' needs to know the number of marriages and the factors affecting them."

Perhaps that is not a convincing argument for a new census today.

The Liberal Democrats welcome the Executive's change of view. We believe that it is correct to include a question on religion and to expand the ethnicity question. We are pleased by the minister's concession and we accept his good faith. If the Executive changes its mind, we should not castigate it for doing so; by doing that, we might risk its not doing so in future on other matters.

It would be good to include a question on Scots language, but the effect of the SNP motion would be to annul the census. We cannot vote for an annulment of the census, as that would hold up the whole process. The registrar general would not be able to recruit enumerators and we would delay the vital census for a considerable time. However, there is clearly considerable interest in the Scots language on all sides of the Parliament. I agree with Ian Jenkins that a census question is not the only way in which we can promote the Scots language. I hope that, despite the absence of a question in the census, there will be work to promote the language in schools and universities.

What causes us most concern is the absence of a question on income. It is said that including such a question would have an adverse response on the response rate, but Mr Wallace mentioned that there would be no penalties for not answering the religious question that is to be incorporated and the same ruling could apply to the question on income. If there were no penalties for not answering the income question, the response rate would be higher.

We are told that the inclusion of a question on income has cost implications. That might be so, but that cost must be balanced against the costs of the wrong policy being adopted because of a lack of information. We must ensure that the information that the census delivers can be used by local authorities, a necessity to which Margaret Ewing gave eloquent testimony.

Councils in rural areas, and the Scottish Executive rural affairs department, say quite clearly that objective measures to define rural deprivation do not exist. If we have the opportunity to address that deficiency by including a question on income in the census, I cannot see why we would not do so. There is an important implication for public policy: the information will greatly assist us in deciding on grant distribution to local authorities.

I note Des McNulty's view that there might be other ways of collecting the information, but if the information has not been collected by those methods in the past, what confidence can we have that it will be collected in the future?

We give a general welcome to the census and accept the concessions that the Executive has made. It is a pity that the question on the Scots language will not be included, but we are not prepared to delay the census process on that basis. We are concerned about the absence of the income question from the census and are particularly keen to hear from the minister what is intended to compensate for its absence.

16:37

Mr Jamie McGrigor (Highlands and Islands) (Con): I am happy to be speaking on fishing once again—the census is simply a huge exercise in fishing for information.

A great deal of money has already been spent. The estimated cost of the Scottish census is £23.2 million by 2002. Since the exercise is so expensive, it is vital that we get it right and include questions that will provide valuable information on the whereabouts and needs of our population for the next 10 years.

Like Trish Marwick, I was amused by the comments of John Rickman, the clerk to the House of Commons at the end of the 18th century. Outlining 12 arguments in favour of a census, he said:

"In a time when many fear the disaffection of the people, doing a census would improve the Government's image as setting out to promote the public good".

That was more than 200 years ago. Nothing much changes, does it? To judge by the low turnouts in recent elections—most notably the most recent European election—people are more disaffected than ever. An improvement of the Government's image would be more welcome than ever. Our message to the Government is, "Stop spinning and have a good census."

Mr Rickman also said that the life insurance industry would be stimulated by the results. I bet that today's life insurance companies would love to get their hands on the results of the census. Luckily, however, confidentiality is assured: the census forms are withheld from the public for 100 years.

As a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee, I am glad that Mr Wallace has seen fit to agree to a question on religion. Scotland's reputation as a tolerant nation would have been at risk if we were the only country not to have a census question on religion.

We should be grateful to the Commission for Racial Equality for its work towards that goal, to Brian Monteith for his earlier motion on the subject and to members of parties other than my own—Irene McGugan, Donald Gorrie, Dennis Canavan and others—who signed that motion and showed undoubted cross-party support for the inclusion of a question on religion.

I am glad that the ethnicity question is being revised and that the Executive proposes to consult bodies, including the Equal Opportunities Committee, on the precise formulation of a new question. I hope that the Executive will give thought to the inclusion of a category for travelling people of different ethnic origins, such as those identified as gypsies and Romanies. They can certainly lay claim to having one of the oldest histories of any group in the UK. It is to be hoped that increased recognition would lessen the prejudice and persecution that they have suffered in the past and unfortunately still suffer today. When we formulate the question on ethnicity, we should achieve the aims set out by the CRE. We welcome the Executive's change of heart on the issue.

Although I take Tommy Sheridan's point and the spirit with which it was put, a question on income would throw the entire validity of the census into question. Previous census tests show that people are very sensitive when asked about such matters, which leads to unanswered questions and inaccurate results. Other methods exist for obtaining that information and I would hate to jeopardise the outcome of such an important document when those alternatives are to hand.

I am a firm advocate of the protection of the Scots language. Like Gaelic, its history is timeless and is surrounded by romance. I love the poetry of Burns and MacDiarmid and never go anywhere without my nickie-tams. However, although I would like the question to be put to the Scottish people, I see no straightforward way of doing so. We can go round in circles debating what exactly constitutes a language or a dialect, argue about its origins and where it is spoken, and lately most of us have been doing so. If we cannot agree on what exactly the Scots language is, how can we expect the Scottish public collectively to comprehend any question on the subject? Although the eight-volume Scots language dictionary and the Scots edition of the James VI bible prove the validity of the argument for what I consider to be Scots, a true definition of Scots does not yet exist. We can only hope that such a definition has been established when the next census comes around.

I am encouraged by the news that the boosted household survey will include a question on Scots. From the point of view of the Equal Opportunities Committee, we now have a question on religion and a question on ethnicity, and, in the words of the song, two out of three ain't bad.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: I am sorry to tell members that no provision was made in the order of speakers for Tommy Sheridan to sum up. If the minister and the SNP make the generous gesture of giving up a minute and a half of their summing-up time, I could squeeze him in for up to three minutes. Is that acceptable?

Members indicated agreement.

16:43

Tommy Sheridan: I thank both the minister and the SNP.

I have found the discussion so far a bit frustrating. Conservative members have argued against including a question on income in the census, but Labour and Liberal Democrat speakers have all argued that a question on income is not only desirable, but required. Indeed, one of the best speeches was the Liberal Democrat summing-up. My difficulty with the idea of accepting a recommendation to consider the question in the future is that the next census is in 10 years' time. If we want the most reliable piece of data that includes a question on income, we must grasp the opportunity now.

I therefore appeal to the Labour and Liberal Democrat members who believe in their heart of hearts that the census should include a question on income to suspend the idea that we have to vote along party lines. I hope that there is not a whip on this vote, and I appeal to those members' independent spirit.

In a letter to Kate MacLean, the convener of the Equal Opportunities Committee, Jim Wallace said that a question on income

"would lead to a significant non-return rate, distorting the data on income"

as well as other aspects of the census. I hope that, when the next System 3/Herald poll shows a more than 3 per cent fall in Liberal Democrat support, Jim Wallace will accept that that is a significant fall in support. This is the first time that a fall of less than 3 per cent has been described as significant, and that position must be questioned.

I remind the chamber that Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden all ask a question on income, as do the United States, Australia, New Zealand, and Canada. In America, the census return rate is 98.4 per cent and in Australia, the rate is 91 per cent. It is clear that a question on income does not lead to a significant non-return of forms.

Finally, I remind the chamber that the census test—which has been cited as evidence that there would be significant non-return—was a voluntary survey, but the census has legal backing. If social policy is to be properly targeted, it is necessary that we have reliable, detailed information on income. I ask members to support my amendment.

16:46

Shona Robison (North-East Scotland) (SNP): As has been said, the strength of the Equal Opportunities Committee's motion was that it was agreed on an all-encompassing, all-party basis. It was based on principle and covered the three interrelated elements of ethnicity, religion and language, including the Scots language. As the committee's convener said recently, this is the first census that the Scottish Parliament has had to deal with, and we should do so in a cross-party way, taking on board what others feel is important. It is a pity that the Executive has not seen fit to follow suit by accepting all aspects of the motion, including the question on language spoken in the home and on Scots language.

The Executive's position is all the more remarkable when we consider that the Deputy First Minister has a track record of supporting a Scots language question in the census. He says that he has since seen the light and is now better informed; although the minister can be accused of many things, consistency is not one of them. It is a pity that he has left the chamber—[Interruption.] I see that, in fact, he has returned just in time.

I want to speak about the chain of events that led to this debate.

Mr Jim Wallace: Will the member give way?

Shona Robison: Yes.

Mr Wallace: I was listening to Shona Robison. If she expects ministers to listen, she must accept that sometimes we will listen and come to conclusions that she does not like.

Shona Robison: I hope that he will listen more often, and that he will sometimes do so at an earlier stage. There are lessons to be learned from how this episode was handled. Since 10 January, the Executive has refused consistently to include any of the additional questions. When the Equal Opportunities Committee made its position clear, there were jitters all round about a possible defeat, so the Executive embarked on a process of delaying the debate until 16 February to try, I think, to persuade the Equal Opportunities Committee to change its mind. The Deputy First Minister attempted to do that last week with a performance that made people more determined to stick to their guns. However, after press coverage at the weekend there was a series of U-turns.

We do not want hastily drawn-up letters to appear on desks the night before debates, such as the one that left the Equal Opportunities Committee in the difficult position today of having to decide whether to withdraw its motion. That is not how this Parliament should do business, and I hope that we will learn lessons for the future. The power and influence of the Equal Opportunities Committee in this matter should be welcomed.

It has been said that if the SNP's motion were accepted, the process of passing the order would be delayed. That is a spurious argument, as we have all agreed to facilitate the passage of legislation. I am sure that an amended order could be passed quickly. It is important to get Scotland's first census right; it is important that we get all the questions right and do not miss this opportunity.

We are disappointed that the Executive has not seen fit to accept the question on languages spoken in the home, and on the Scots language. The Commission for Racial Equality argued vociferously for a question on languages spoken in the home, because the answers would indicate change over time and assist in the planning of bilingual education.

As Linda Fabiani said, the question would also inform a national strategy on interpreting and translating. That is an under-resourced area, which Jim Wallace has still to address in the light of the Macpherson report. I hope that he will come forward with new resources for that service as quickly as possible. No equivalent data are available from survey information and much service delivery is hampered by the lack of that information.

The other omission—surprise, surprise—is the Scots language. As I have said before, Scots used to be supported by the Deputy First Minister. Perhaps one reason why the Executive does not want to find out how many people speak, read or write Scots is that it is estimated that 1.5 million do, yet Scots receives only £112,000 a year in funding. That amounts to less than 10p per person. Scots is clearly the worst-funded indigenous minority language in Europe.

People have suggested that the question on Scots may not be understood. It might be difficult to phrase such a question clearly, but it would not be impossible. It is important that we get the census right, rather than embark on a census that is lacking.

Members from all parties have given their support to the inclusion of a census question on Scots. They have supported such a question in the past and I hope that they will support such a question today, unlike the Deputy First Minister. Other members whom I did not know supported the Scots language have spoken in favour of the question and that is encouraging.

The argument for the inclusion of a question on income has been made vociferously by Tommy Sheridan, Des McNulty and others. I hope that the Parliament will agree to that—the SNP would support that.

I urge members to support the motion in the name of Irene McGugan. The Scots language deserves to be treated with more respect and including it in the census would be a good start.

16:52

The Deputy Minister for Communities (Jackie Baillie): I am familiar with the concerns that have been raised about the draft census order because of my equal opportunities responsibilities. It is evident to everyone that the Executive has listened carefully to what the Equal Opportunities Committee has had to say. We are grateful to the committee for stressing the contribution that the census can make to equality proofing and social inclusion policies.

Although the debate has tended to concentrate on three or four particular census questions—and I shall come back to specific points made on those—we must not lose sight of the whole census package. The census is probably the most important source of social and socio-economic statistics. Its special value lies in producing data for small areas; that helps those who have to plan and deliver local services, such as health, education, housing, transport, social services and community care.

We have taken account of the Equal Opportunities Committee's view that census users will need to make fuller use of information about ethnic and religious groups in future. To include a question on religion, we will need to pass primary legislation to amend the Census Act 1920. To enable us to achieve that without putting severe strain on the census timetable, I hope that members will accommodate the fast-tracking of that legislation, allowing the draft amendment order to be laid at the earliest date.

The census is feasible only if we use self-completion forms; interviewer completion would not be practical. Someone needs to view the operation from the form-filler's point of view, remembering that completion is compulsory. In reply to Elaine Smith's point, I must tell members that we intend to provide assistance in the form of a helpline and a minicom number for the hard of hearing. We will liaise with the voluntary sector to ensure that we promote the census properly.

A form that is longer than three pages per person will affect response rates. The changes that we have announced today on religion and ethnic group will need to be accommodated within that constraint.

Des McNulty, Tommy Sheridan and others argued for a question on income. While we recognise the strength of the case that such a question would allow for useful cross-referencing, there was clear evidence from tests carried out by the registrar general that inclusion of such a question risked alienating the public, lowering response and so reducing the effectiveness of the whole census.

Mr Sheridan is not entirely correct in his assertions. I agree with the need for improved data for social inclusion purposes, but there are alternative sources that can give that information: the DSS small area income data; Inland Revenue data; the Scottish household survey, which asks specific questions on income that are then cross-referenced to information on health, education and so on; and new modelling techniques. I give an assurance that we intend to pursue the objective of producing and disseminating data by the time those census outputs are available in 2002 and 2003. I hope that that gives the assurance wanted by Des McNulty, Sylvia Jackson and others.

Kate MacLean and the Equal Opportunities Committee argued for a question on language spoken in the home, but the real need is to identify a lack of ability in English where that may affect the delivery of services. Tests have shown that a question on language spoken in the home does not work as a proxy for that information, since many fluent English speakers use a different language in the home. I give my guarantee to Kate MacLean that the household survey, boosted to examine ethnic minorities in Scotland, will cover that specific point. The Commission for Racial Equality, the race equality advisory forum and others will be involved in pulling that together. I am also happy to guarantee that the Equal Opportunities Committee will be consulted on that.

I emphasise that the Executive provides support for the Scots language and recognises the role of Scots in our cultural life. This issue is not about recognition of the Scots language or—I say to Brian Adam—about understanding the Scots language. The term Scots means different things to different people. The sampling that was undertaken underlined that and showed that the data we would get would be unreliable and could not be used with accuracy for planning purposes.

I should clarify the issue raised by Malcolm Chisholm and Brian Adam. I guarantee the inclusion of a question on language spoken in the home in the ethnic minority boost of the Scottish household survey. However, Scots are not an ethnic minority.

I would like to reassure the public about how we collect, store and use all the information collected in the census. Census information is used only for statistical purposes. The Census Act 1920 makes it a criminal offence for census office staff, or agents providing services to the registrar general, to pass on information to anyone other than people employed by, or providing services to, the registrar general for purposes covered by the act. The forms will be kept secure for 100 years. There are no security concerns.

If the census is to proceed as planned, it is important that we do not annul the draft order today. If the order were annulled, which is what Irene McGugan's motion would do, we would have to recommence the whole procedure and it is not clear that we could hold the census on the planned date.

The census will provide vital information for the work of this Parliament as well as the wider community. The draft order fixes the date of the census and the basic data to be collected. We have said how we plan to accommodate members' concerns. We will lay an amendment order to include a question on religion when the necessary change in primary legislation has been made. We will also expand the ethnic group question on the basis of the consultation that I outlined earlier.

I am unclear about the SNP's position. When the Executive listens to the Equal Opportunities Committee and reviews the matter, are we to be condemned or congratulated? We have listened and where a case has been made we have acted.

I move,

That the Parliament approves the draft Census (Scotland) Order 2000 to the extent that it relates to the following particulars in Schedule 2—

(a) in item 1, the words "indicating whether an individual form is being completed by that member";

in item 2, the words "and relationship to the first person mentioned in the return, and, as the case may be, where there are 5 or less persons in the household, the relationship of each of the previous persons mentioned in the return and where there are 6 or more persons in the household, the relationship of the sixth and subsequent persons to the two previously mentioned persons in the return";

in item 6, the words "and if married whether first or subsequent subsisting marriage";

items 7,11,12,13,14,16,17;

in item 18, the words "or was on a Government sponsored training scheme";

items 19, 27, 28, 29, 31, 32;

and items 1, 2 and 3 of Schedule 3 to the draft Order.

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): Before we come to decision time, I wish to make the observation that, as a matter of common courtesy, those who take part in debates ought to be here to listen to the winding-up speeches.

Decision Time

17:00

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): We now come to the three questions that are to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S1M-554, in the name of Irene McGugan, on the draft Census (Scotland) Order 2000, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

Members: No.

The Presiding Officer: There is disagreement, so there will be a division. Members who wish to support Irene McGugan's motion should press yes.

FOR

Adam, Brian (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Campbell, Colin (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Canavan, Dennis (Falkirk West)
Cunningham, Roseanna (Perth) (SNP)
Ewing, Fergus (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP)
Ewing, Mrs Margaret (Moray) (SNP)
Ewing, Dr Winnie (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Fabiani, Linda (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Gibson, Mr Kenneth (Glasgow) (SNP)
Grahame, Christine (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Hamilton, Mr Duncan (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Harper, Robin (Lothians) (Green)
Hyslop, Fiona (Lothians) (SNP)
Ingram, Mr Adam (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Lochhead, Richard (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
MacAskill, Mr Kenny (Lothians) (SNP)
MacDonald, Ms Margo (Lothians) (SNP)
Marwick, Tricia (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Matheson, Michael (Central Scotland) (SNP)
McGugan, Irene (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
McLeod, Fiona (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Neil, Alex (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Paterson, Mr Gil (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Quinan, Mr Lloyd (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Robison, Shona (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Salmond, Mr Alex (Banff and Buchan) (SNP)
Sheridan, Tommy (Glasgow) (SSP)
Sturgeon, Nicola (Glasgow) (SNP)
Swinney, Mr John (North Tayside) (SNP)
Ullrich, Kay (West of Scotland) (SNP)
White, Ms Sandra (Glasgow) (SNP)

AGAINST

Aitken, Bill (Glasgow) (Con)
Alexander, Ms Wendy (Paisley North) (Lab)
Baillie, Jackie (Dumbarton) (Lab)
Barrie, Scott (Dunfermline West) (Lab)
Boyack, Sarah (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
Brown, Robert (Glasgow) (LD)
Chisholm, Malcolm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab)
Craigie, Cathie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab)
Curran, Ms Margaret (Glasgow Baillieston) (Lab)
Davidson, Mr David (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Deacon, Susan (Edinburgh East and Musselburgh) (Lab)
Dewar, Donald (Glasgow Anniesland) (Lab)
Douglas-Hamilton, Lord James (Lothians) (Con)
Eadie, Helen (Dunfermline East) (Lab)
Ferguson, Patricia (Glasgow Maryhill) (Lab)
Fergusson, Alex (South of Scotland) (Con)
Finnie, Ross (West of Scotland) (LD)
Galbraith, Mr Sam (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)
Gallie, Phil (South of Scotland) (Con)
Gillon, Karen (Clydesdale) (Lab)
Godman, Trish (West Renfrewshire) (Lab)
Goldie, Miss Annabel (West of Scotland) (Con)
Gray, Iain (Edinburgh Pentlands) (Lab)
Harding, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Home Robertson, Mr John (East Lothian) (Lab)
Hughes, Janis (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab)
Jackson, Gordon (Glasgow Govan) (Lab)
Jackson, Dr Sylvia (Stirling) (Lab)
Jamieson, Cathy (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab)
Jamieson, Margaret (Kilmarnock and Loudoun) (Lab)
Jenkins, Ian (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD)
Johnston, Nick (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Johnstone, Alex (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Lamont, Johann (Glasgow Pollok) (Lab)
Livingstone, Marilyn (Kirkcaldy) (Lab)
Lyon, George (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
McGrigor, Mr Jamie (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
MacLean, Kate (Dundee West) (Lab)
Macdonald, Lewis (Aberdeen Central) (Lab)
Martin, Paul (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab)
McAllion, Mr John (Dundee East) (Lab)
McAveety, Mr Frank (Glasgow Shettleston) (Lab)
McCabe, Mr Tom (Hamilton South) (Lab)
McConnell, Mr Jack (Motherwell and Wishaw) (Lab)
Macintosh, Mr Kenneth (Eastwood) (Lab)
McIntosh, Mrs Lyndsay (Central Scotland) (Con)
MacKay, Angus (Edinburgh South) (Lab)
McLeish, Henry (Central Fife) (Lab)
McMahon, Mr Michael (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab)
Macmillan, Maureen (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
McNeil, Mr Duncan (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab)
McNeill, Pauline (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab)
McNulty, Des (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab)
Monteith, Mr Brian (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Morrison, Mr Alasdair (Western Isles) (Lab)
Muldoon, Bristow (Livingston) (Lab)
Mulligan, Mrs Mary (Linlithgow) (Lab)
Murray, Dr Elaine (Dumfries) (Lab)
Peacock, Peter (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Peattie, Cathy (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Robson, Euan (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD)
Rumbles, Mr Mike (West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine) (LD)
Scanlon, Mary (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Simpson, Dr Richard (Ochil) (Lab)
Smith, Elaine (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab)
Smith, Iain (North-East Fife) (LD)
Smith, Mrs Margaret (Edinburgh West) (LD)
Stephen, Nicol (Aberdeen South) (LD)
Stone, Mr Jamie (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
Thomson, Elaine (Aberdeen North) (Lab)
Tosh, Mr Murray (South of Scotland) (Con)
Wallace, Ben (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Wallace, Mr Jim (Orkney) (LD)
Watson, Mike (Glasgow Cathcart) (Lab)
Wilson, Allan (Cunninghame North) (Lab)

ABSTENTIONS

Radcliffe, Nora (Gordon) (LD)

The Presiding Officer: The result of the division is: For 31, Against 75, Abstentions 1.

Motion disagreed to.

The Presiding Officer: The second question is, that amendment S1M-459.1, in the name of Tommy Sheridan, which seeks to amend motion S1M-459, in the name of Mr Jim Wallace, on the draft Census (Scotland) Order 2000, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

Members: No.

The Presiding Officer: There will be a division. Those who wish to support Mr Sheridan's amendment should press yes.

FOR

Adam, Brian (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Campbell, Colin (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Canavan, Dennis (Falkirk West)
Cunningham, Roseanna (Perth) (SNP)
Ewing, Dr Winnie (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Ewing, Fergus (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP)
Ewing, Mrs Margaret (Moray) (SNP)
Fabiani, Linda (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Gibson, Mr Kenneth (Glasgow) (SNP)
Grahame, Christine (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Hamilton, Mr Duncan (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)
Harper, Robin (Lothians) (Green)
Hyslop, Fiona (Lothians) (SNP)
Ingram, Mr Adam (South of Scotland) (SNP)
Lochhead, Richard (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
MacAskill, Mr Kenny ((Lothians) (SNP)
MacDonald, Ms Margo (Lothians) (SNP)
Marwick, Tricia (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Matheson, Michael ((Central Scotland) (SNP)
McGugan, Irene (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
McLeod, Fiona (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Mundell, David (South of Scotland) (Con)
Neil, Alex (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Paterson, Mr Gil (Central Scotland) (SNP)
Quinan, Mr Lloyd (West of Scotland) (SNP)
Reid, Mr George (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP)
Robison, Shona (North-East Scotland) (SNP)
Salmond, Mr Alex (Banff and Buchan) (SNP)
Sheridan, Tommy (Glasgow) (SSP)
Sturgeon, Nicola (Glasgow) (SNP)
Swinney, Mr John (North Tayside) (SNP)
Ullrich, Kay (West of Scotland) (SNP)
White, Ms Sandra (Glasgow) (SNP)

AGAINST

Aitken, Bill (Glasgow) (Con)
Alexander, Ms Wendy (Paisley North) (Lab)
Baillie, Jackie (Dumbarton) (Lab)
Barrie, Scott (Dunfermline West) (Lab)
Boyack, Sarah (Edinburgh Central) (Lab)
Brown, Robert (Glasgow) (LD)
Chisholm, Malcolm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab)
Craigie, Cathie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab)
Curran, Ms Margaret (Glasgow Baillieston) (Lab)
Davidson, Mr David (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Deacon, Susan (Edinburgh East and Musselburgh) (Lab)
Dewar, Donald (Glasgow Anniesland) (Lab)
Douglas-Hamilton, Lord James (Lothians) (Con)
Eadie, Helen (Dunfermline East) (Lab)
Ferguson, Patricia (Glasgow Maryhill) (Lab)
Fergusson, Alex (South of Scotland) (Con)
Finnie, Ross (West of Scotland) (LD)
Galbraith, Mr Sam (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)
Gallie, Phil (South of Scotland) (Con)
Gillon, Karen (Clydesdale) (Lab)
Godman, Trish (West Renfrewshire) (Lab)
Goldie, Miss Annabel (West of Scotland) (Con)
Gray, Iain (Edinburgh Pentlands) (Lab)
Harding, Mr Keith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Home Robertson, Mr John (East Lothian) (Lab)
Hughes, Janis (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab)
Jackson, Dr Sylvia (Stirling) (Lab)
Jackson, Gordon (Glasgow Govan) (Lab)
Jamieson, Cathy (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab)
Jamieson, Margaret (Kilmarnock and Loudoun) (Lab)
Jenkins, Ian (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD)
Johnston, Nick (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Johnstone, Alex (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Lamont, Johann (Glasgow Pollok) (Lab)
Livingstone, Marilyn (Kirkcaldy) (Lab)
Lyon, George (Argyll and Bute) (LD)
Macdonald, Lewis (Aberdeen Central) (Lab)
McGrigor, Mr Jamie (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Macintosh, Mr Kenneth (Eastwood) (Lab)
MacLean, Kate (Dundee West) (Lab)
Macmillan, Maureen (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Martin, Paul (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab)
McAveety, Mr Frank (Glasgow Shettleston) (Lab)
McCabe, Mr Tom (Hamilton South) (Lab)
McConnell, Mr Jack (Motherwell and Wishaw) (Lab)
McIntosh, Mrs Lyndsay (Central Scotland) (Con)
MacKay, Angus (Edinburgh South) (Lab)
McLeish, Henry (Central Fife) (Lab)
McMahon, Mr Michael (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab)
McNeil, Mr Duncan (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab)
McNeill, Pauline (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab)
McNulty, Des (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab)
Monteith, Mr Brian ((Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)
Morrison, Mr Alasdair (Western Isles) (Lab)
Muldoon, Bristow (Livingston) (Lab)
Mulligan, Mrs Mary (Linlithgow) (Lab)
Munro, Mr John (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD)
Murray, Dr Elaine (Dumfries) (Lab)
Peacock, Peter (Highlands and Islands) (Lab)
Peattie, Cathy (Falkirk East) (Lab)
Radcliffe, Nora (Gordon) (LD)
Rumbles, Mr Mike (West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine) (LD)
Scanlon, Mary (Highlands and Islands) (Con)
Simpson, Dr Richard (Ochil) (Lab)
Smith, Elaine (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab)
Smith, Iain (North-East Fife) (LD)
Smith, Mrs Margaret (Edinburgh West) (LD)
Stephen, Nicol (Aberdeen South) (LD)
Stone, Mr Jamie (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
Thomson, Elaine (Aberdeen North) (Lab)
Tosh, Mr Murray (South of Scotland) (Con)
Wallace, Ben (North-East Scotland) (Con)
Wallace, Mr Jim (Orkney) (LD)
Watson, Mike (Glasgow Cathcart) (Lab)
Wilson, Allan (Cunninghame North) (Lab)

ABSTENTIONS

McAllion, Mr John (Dundee East) (Lab)
Robson, Euan (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (LD)

The Presiding Officer: The result of the division is: For 33, Against 75, Abstentions 2.

Amendment disagreed to.

The Presiding Officer: The third question is, that motion S1M-459, in the name of Mr Jim Wallace, on the draft Census (Scotland) Order 2000, be agreed to.

Motion agreed to.

That the Parliament approves the draft Census (Scotland) Order 2000 to the extent that it relates to the following particulars in Schedule 2—

(a) in item 1, the words "indicating whether an individual form is being completed by that member";

in item 2, the words "and relationship to the first person mentioned in the return, and, as the case may be, where there are 5 or less persons in the household, the relationship of each of the previous persons mentioned in the return and where there are 6 or more persons in the household, the relationship of the sixth and subsequent persons to the two previously mentioned persons in the return";

in item 6, the words "and if married whether first or subsequent subsisting marriage";

items 7, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17;

in item 18, the words "or was on a Government sponsored training scheme";

items 19, 27, 28, 29, 31, 32;

and items 1, 2 and 3 of Schedule 3 to the draft Order.


British Sign Language

The Presiding Officer (Sir David Steel): We move to the members' business debate on sign language. On this occasion in particular, I ask members who are leaving to do so quickly and quietly, because it should be noted that for this debate I have agreed that signers for the deaf should be situated in the public galleries and on the floor of the chamber. We may wish to welcome those who are assisting in our debate. [Applause.]

I must remind visitors to the public gallery that they are not allowed to applaud. Even in sign language, they must be silent. The signers are in place, and I have much pleasure in asking Dr Ewing to open the debate.

Motion debated,

That the Parliament notes that the British Sign Language is used as an essential communication tool by a substantial number of people in Scotland and has a strong historic tradition; recognises the pressure on interpreters who are in constant demand particularly in rural areas; notes that the British Deaf Association is seeking review of the recognition, rights and support applied to the language; expresses the hope that the Scottish Executive will assist the process by taking actions to implement the European Parliament's recognition of Sign Language as an official language in each of the member states, and recognises the importance and necessity of British Sign Language by integrating signing into the plenary sessions of the Parliament.

17:03

Dr Winnie Ewing (Highlands and Islands) (SNP): I thank all concerned for the opportunity to have the debate, and members for their cross-party support for the motion, which is now my motion conjoined with Cathie Craigie's. I also thank these brilliant signers, who are rare birds—there are only 32 in Scotland.

Today, we in this Parliament are brought face to face with hundreds of visitors from our deaf community, with the clamant needs of the deaf—the Cinderella of the disabled. Many children are born deaf, and 90 per cent of them are born to hearing parents. This statistic is not clear, because we take it as a proportion of the UK figure, but in Scotland we have between 5,000 and 7,000 people who were born profoundly deaf. They have never heard a human voice. They have never heard a note of music. They have never heard the birds singing.

The British Deaf Association has a just aim. It wants access on equal terms to all walks of life: health, education, culture and social activity. Those people want the right to achieve their full potential, the right to self-esteem, and the right to dignity for their deaf identity. I submit that that is a fundamental human right.

My motion, as I said, is conjoined, and it calls for the recognition of British Sign Language—BSL—which is the natural first language of the deaf in this country. BSL is an ancient and indigenous language. It is centuries old, and dates back to the Venerable Bede. In the United Kingdom, the number of people who use BSL is higher than the numbers who speak Welsh and Gaelic added together. It is a living, evolving language, with its own grammar and its own humour. It is capable of expressing the full range of philosophical thought. It is as complex and sophisticated as any spoken language.

To sign is natural for deaf children. It should be their first language, with English their second. Sign language was banned in Italy in 1880, with enormous effects internationally for the concept of signing. Oral speech for the deaf was encouraged. That is achievable, but not for all. Sign language, however, is natural to all.

If the learning of signing is followed by the learning of the spoken language, the deaf are helped to become literate and to develop their full potential. We must have a bilingual and bicultural approach. The deaf live in a hearing world, and they walk on hearing streets.

We are now beginning actively to encourage mainstream education for deaf children, but that can cause isolation for a deaf child if back-up is not available in their classrooms every day.

Yesterday, the parents of a deaf child who is sitting standard grade wrote to me. I believe that they are in the gallery. They wrote that the Scottish Qualifications Authority refuses to let their daughter sign her answers, so she may fail, not for a lack of knowledge, but because of her poor written skills, which are in a state of evolution.

Today, I received a letter from Highland Council that pointed out how many deaf children from the Highlands, because of a lack of special services there, have to leave home at a very early age to go to residential schools.

My friend Jack Ashley, who went deaf overnight, explained to me that if he had been born deaf, he would not have had the skills necessary to become an MP, but because he went deaf as an adult, he had the extensive vocabulary that deaf people all want to acquire. When conversing with me, Jack used to complain that my Scottish accent made it difficult for him to lip-read.

Teachers of the deaf require no qualifications in signing. The minister should address that, because it seems quite extraordinary to all the deaf people I have spoken to.

The deaf are just as interested in politics, current affairs and literature as any hearing people. When I was MP for Hamilton, I visited the deaf school, and the children then paid a visit to the House of Commons. I toured the palace with them, pointing out any famous faces that I saw. Jim Wallace was not there at that time, I think.

The Deputy First Minister and Minister for Justice (Mr Jim Wallace): I was still at school.

Dr Ewing: I pointed out one face. "That's Enoch Powell," said I. A teacher asked the deaf children, "What's Enoch Powell famous for?" A teenage girl immediately replied, "He doesn't like black people." The child was totally up to the minute.

There is some recognition in legislation of deaf people's needs. The Broadcasting Act 1996 provides for signing for a percentage—a very small percentage—of certain programmes. The Disability Discrimination Act 1995, which does not cover education, covers access enablement, but much more has to be done. Deaf people have explained to me that there are many grey areas in legislation.

The Welsh Assembly has already called for BSL to receive official recognition. In the European Parliament, when I chaired the culture and education committee, we initiated a resolution that called for member states to recognise sign language in each state. Of course, the sign languages are all different. It was passed, almost unanimously, in 1988, but only four European Union states have given that recognition—Denmark, Finland, Sweden and Portugal. Thirteen other countries, including Uganda, have given that recognition. Surely if Uganda can do it, the Scottish Parliament could fight to ensure that we do it.

Under the umbrella of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, which obliges a state to protect such languages and to ensure access, the route to recognition would be simple. Scandinavia is miles ahead; in her speech, Cathie Craigie intends to give some examples of that.

Let all of us ensure that, in our new democracy, no deaf or hearing person is ever left behind and that no deaf person is ever the subject of social exclusion.

17:11

Cathie Craigie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab): I welcome the opportunity to speak in support of the motion. However, I ask that, in view of the large number of members and—more important—the many members of the public who have shown an interest, the Presiding Officer considers extending the time allocated to tonight's debate, to allow those members who wish to contribute to do so.

The Deputy Presiding Officer (Patricia Ferguson): I will come back to the member on that at the end of her speech.

Cathie Craigie: Thank you.

The interest from across Scotland and the number of people in the public gallery today demonstrate the need for elected representatives and communities to work together. I think that the fact that the Parliament is debating a joint motion from Dr Ewing and me highlights the need for co-operation on this issue.

The Scottish Parliament should lead by example; I am extremely pleased that today's debate is being signed. In a small way, it shows, to more than 100,000 users, our commitment to the use and to the future of BSL. I strongly believe that we have an opportunity here, not only through today's debate. With Scotland watching what we do next, the debate will be crucial to the cause of raising deaf awareness.

The Scottish Parliament, as a new body, has a superb opportunity to increase its own accessibility to the deaf community. It is hoped that training—for members and staff who wish to take that opportunity—will be provided soon. Regular signing in the chamber would be a public recognition of BSL. There is a real need to promote BSL and to increase the public's awareness of its existence and its importance to so many people. The Scottish Parliament should lead the way on that.

As Winnie Ewing has said, many people have misconceptions about BSL; they see it as a kind of gesture translation of English and not as a different language. It is commonly thought that sign language is international—some sort of Esperanto. We know that that is not true, but our job is to increase the public's understanding.

For those who support BSL—as we can see today, there are many of them—there are numerous barriers to complete inclusion into hearing society. The problem of misconception, due partly to BSL's lack of recognition, is only one such barrier to inclusion and access, which leads to many other barriers.

Recognition of BSL as an official language would be a big first step to increasing access for our deaf community. The use of BSL has proliferated; more than 100,000 people in Scotland use it, which is a third more than the number of people who speak Gaelic. I agree with the recognition given to Gaelic and the resources targeted at Gaelic speakers, but I think that the same recognition should be given to BSL users.

Other things are needed. There are around 6,000 people in Scotland whose first language is BSL. Although the language is not derived from English, the vast majority of information and communication methods are, so much of what hearing people take for granted is severely restricted for BSL users. In fact, accessing everything, including—as Winnie pointed out—politics, is much harder for the deaf community and is often a struggle.

We need to examine ways of improving access for BSL users. I agree with the "Sensing Progress" report that new technology needs to be fully exploited to support BSL users as well as deaf people who use other forms of communication such as lip-reading and lip-speaking.

The Scottish Parliament can set an example in terms of the availability and accessibility of information. Publications and consultation documents could be made available in BSL. The Parliament should be proud of the website. It is a resource that could be exploited further by doing small things such as using more moving pictures and having videos of signed debates.

Private companies, public organisations and the Scottish Executive also need to address communication problems and I encourage them to do so. Access for the deaf community at all levels—especially on television—must be improved. For example, many of our news and current affairs programmes are broadcast without signing or subtitles. Why? I recognise that the scope of the matter is wide, in terms not only of BSL and the rights of the deaf community, but of those people in Scotland who are deaf-blind and who find themselves caught between two stools. Unfortunately, there are many issues that will not be properly addressed in the short time that we have today.

I would like to suggest a way in which we in Scotland can take those issues forward. There is a massive shortage of BSL interpreters in Scotland and throughout the UK. SENSE Scotland says that there are only 32 such interpreters in Scotland, as Winnie Ewing mentioned. Demand completely outstrips supply. That is understandable when one thinks that 6,000 people use BSL as their daily language. We are in dire need of more qualified interpreters. The time is right to address that need.

Finland is one of only four European Union member states that recognise their native sign languages. That country was in a similar situation to the one that Scotland is in—there was a similar number of users of sign language and a similar population. Finland now has a properly constructed training programme, which is funded by the state-controlled lottery, and there are 1,500 fully trained interpreters. Finland was able to achieve that in five to seven years.

In Scotland, what little structure there is for interpreting courses is ad hoc. The only course that I know of is a part-time one that is run at weekends by Heriot-Watt University. The course fees are £3,000. We should look at evaluating that course and giving it professional standing. The establishment of a well-structured, properly funded training programme for signers and interpreters and increased recognition of the problems would go a long way towards meeting the demand for more trained and qualified interpreters.

If a company promised to create 1,500 jobs over five years, there would be a media event and the company would rightly be welcomed with open arms. The jobs are out there—the work needs to be done. We need the vision to recognise that and to create a proper, full-time professional structure that will motivate and encourage people to take that opportunity, which will be of great benefit to the attempt to achieve a more inclusive Scotland.

I have chopped out half of what I wanted to say, Presiding Officer, so, to conclude, I would like to say that in a perfect world I would call for all parliamentary business—plenary and committee meetings—to be signed. I recognise, however, that that would add to the burden on signers, as there are currently not enough of them.

A massive boost to BSL and its users would be gained if important debates and debates of special interest to BSL users and the deaf community were signed. The status of BSL would be boosted if question time—the most high-profile part of Parliament's business and the most accessible through television—was signed. I ask that the parties' business managers and the Parliamentary Bureau take that suggestion on board. The time is right and we should grasp the opportunity to raise deaf awareness, to create jobs and greater job opportunities and to make the everyday things that hearing people take for granted an easier experience for those who are deaf.

I look forward to hearing what Jackie Baillie has to say in reply to the debate. I call on the Executive to establish a working group, similar to the one that was so successful in Finland, to take the issue forward and to examine how access and opportunity for all those in the deaf community can be widened. I hope that this debate is the start of a long-standing commitment to our deaf community by the Scottish Parliament.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: Cathie Craigie asked that the debate be extended. I am minded to accept a motion along such lines, if a member will move one. Before any member does so, and so that we do not completely exhaust our signers, I will say that the motion should be to extend the debate for no more than 10 minutes.

Motion moved,

That the debate be extended by 10 minutes.—[Dr Winnie Ewing.]

Motion agreed to.

17:20

Lord James Douglas-Hamilton (Lothians) (Con): Dr Winnie Ewing is to be strongly congratulated on raising this extremely important issue, on which she has the support of the Royal National Institute for Deaf People, the British Deaf Association and the Edinburgh and East of Scotland Deaf Society.

As Dr Ewing and Cathie Craigie said, there is only a small number—some 32—of registered sign language interpreters in Scotland. They have to provide services for about 7,000 deaf sign language users. That is roughly one sign language interpreter for far more than 200 people—quite clearly, that is not enough. We are a modern, inclusive Parliament and it is right that we should invite the Scottish Executive and Her Majesty's Government to support two calls.

First, we should recognise BSL under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, so as to ensure equal access to public services and information for BSL users. Everyone knows that the recognition of BSL as an official language in Scotland would encourage the training of more sign language interpreters and thereby help the Scottish deaf community.

Secondly, it is reasonable for us to call on the Government and the Scottish Executive to establish a BSL task force to review policy and legislation, with a view to identifying new proposals for legislation to ensure linguistic rights and access to all aspects of life for deaf people.

Our countrymen and countrywomen who are deaf should be given every opportunity to realise their full potential. Fuller access to BSL will help to achieve that extremely worthy aspiration.

I am glad to support Dr Winnie Ewing tonight.

17:22

Mr John Munro (Ross, Skye and Inverness West) (LD): I wish to reiterate earlier comments by welcoming our guests. I am delighted at the number of MSPs who have waited behind to hear the debate—that shows that they still have a lot of compassion and interest in our deaf community.

As I knew nothing about the deaf community's difficulties and problems, I went to speak to a group from the British Deaf Association in Inverness some months ago. Although I was apprehensive about going, it was one of the most enlightening events that I have ever attended.

I quickly became aware of the problems that deaf people daily encounter in situations that we take for granted. For example, one can go to the doctor, the solicitor, the Benefits Agency or the local authority's offices and understand what is being said and what the response is. However, if one is a member of the profoundly deaf community, it is not quite so easy. Many people visit agencies and offices not knowing if they are being understood or even if they are getting a fair hearing. They come away disappointed. Much has to be done to address that.

Another, simple problem was pointed out to me. If one is a member of the travelling public and hears a Tannoy announcement at the airport, the bus station or the railway station that the train, bus or flight is delayed, one understands the position. Members of the deaf community do not have that facility and that creates anxiety and stress for them when they are about their business.

Some months ago, I asked a parliamentary question about support for BSL. I discovered that not much had been done and that not much financial support was being given. This Parliament should consider that issue seriously, because much has to be done.

The BSL struggle echoes the struggles facing tutors of lip-reading when they try to secure funding, albeit in rather different circumstances.

It is surprising that the Welsh Assembly, which debated this matter back in September, is ahead of the Scottish Parliament. Incidentally, I believe that the signer for the Welsh Assembly stood on the floor of that chamber, as is happening here today—although, even this morning, that arrangement was not going to be approved. I am glad that sense has prevailed. The Welsh Assembly decided that it might incorporate some sort of videoconferencing to make communication with the deaf community a bit easier.

A report that has been produced this very day by the Royal National Institute for Deaf People indicates some of the problems that are associated with the lack of support for the deaf community. More than a fifth of deaf patients leave their doctor unsure of what is wrong with them, which is a cause for concern. Twelve per cent of deaf people avoid going to the doctor because they are not confident enough to do so.

Official recognition of BSL will not solve the problem, but it will refocus the issue and put pressure on people in all sorts of ways to provide adequate facilities for profoundly deaf people. The most basic of human rights is the right to communicate in one's own language.

I was interested to find out that there are 17 countries in the world where the national sign language has official recognition. The European Union first passed a resolution 12 years ago requesting that sign language be recognised. Only four countries have complied with that resolution: Denmark, Portugal, Finland and Sweden. The second resolution requesting that countries recognise sign language was passed in 1998. What are we waiting for? Let this Scottish Parliament lead the way. Deaf issues are a fundamental part of the Parliament's equal opportunities agenda, and I hope that we can secure all-party support for the recognition of BSL as an official language in the United Kingdom, in support of those who live and work in our profoundly deaf community.

17:27

Ms Sandra White (Glasgow) (SNP): I take this opportunity to thank Winnie Ewing for raising this issue. As far back as August and September last year, she spoke about lodging a motion such as this one, and I am pleased that it is being debated and has all-party support.

Last November I attended an all-party meeting in Glasgow—I believe that Robert Brown was also there—at which more than 70 members of the public were present. I took along the text of the motion that Winnie had lodged, which was very warmly received. I found the meeting a complete eye-opener, as I had not had much experience of deaf people and the problems that they face. The meeting was very vibrant, very noisy and very informative. I thank Tony Forry for organising it.

I want to give the Parliament a flavour of the meeting and of the interesting and searching questions that were put to the panel, of which I was a member. We were asked whether we thought that the Scottish Parliament should recognise BSL as a language in its own right and whether we believed that a law should be made to protect BSL. It was also made clear to us that there was growing discontent in the deaf community about the services that are available to deaf people—a point that previous speakers have touched on.

It is becoming clear not only to me but to other members of the public that the sign language interpreting service that is provided by social work departments varies according to where people live. The people who attended the meeting asked me what I, as a member of the Scottish Parliament, could do to address such problems. By having this debate today, we are addressing them. I am sure that, with all-party support, they can be overcome.

Earlier, we had a debate on the draft Census (Scotland) Order 2000 and whether it should include a question on the Scots language. During the debate, a number of interesting facts emerged. I will cite two points that I picked up on: the recognition by Europe of Scots as a language; and the lack of translators to enable a wider audience to participate. Are those facts not relevant to the debate that we are having now, and are not deaf people asking for many of the same things? People who are deaf do not want to be treated any differently; they do not want preferential treatment. What they want is recognition of themselves and their language.

17:30

Cathy Jamieson (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab): It was a humbling experience to sit at the back of the chamber during this afternoon's debate on the Scots language, in which a number of references were made to equal opportunities. As many people will know, I am a bit of a communications freak—I like to have my pager, my mobile phone and e-mail. If I sit quietly at the back of the chamber, with my phone in silent mode, I can even send messages back to my office, as long as I am not caught out. However, in a face-to-face encounter with many of the people in the public gallery today, I would be struggling. As MSPs, all of us must take that on board.

One of my constituents—Mrs Barton in Mauchline—brought this matter to my attention just after the election. She wrote to me, urging me to lodge a motion in Parliament to raise awareness of the problems that people with hearing impairments face and to get the Parliament to do something about it. I lodged a motion that sought to get the Parliament to examine the provision of deaf awareness classes to people in local communities at no cost. One of my concerns, as a representative of a community that suffers a great deal of deprivation, is that although many people would be willing to go along to a class to find out more and would even take on learning sign language, the option is not available to them because of cost.

When I worked in social work, I was aware of the difficulties caused by the lack of people who are able to interpret. I worked with a family in which both parents suffered from hearing impairments and used sign language, but whose child was not deaf. The child was used as an interpreter, sometimes on inappropriate occasions, to deal with family business with which a young child, frankly, should not have to deal.

There are a number of issues. The Parliament, I hope, wants—or should want—to have more opportunity to provide signing so that more people can participate fully. Unless we are able to do that, the Parliament cannot claim genuinely to be taking equal opportunities on board.

Finally, people must follow my Ayrshire accent and the speed at which I speak. We all ought to be aware that when we are ranting on in the Parliament, people who use lip-reading techniques are watching us on television and will have difficulty following us. Some of us need to take that on board.

I thank Cathie Craigie and Winnie Ewing for securing this debate. It has been a privilege to speak this afternoon. I hope that now we will take some action.

17:33

Robert Brown (Glasgow) (LD): I add my welcome to the visitors in the gallery. My comments will echo the experiences of a number of people. I have had a little contact with this issue, as I have a friend in Glasgow who runs the society for the deaf in Glasgow and the west of Scotland, which is now called Deaf Connections. He has given me some insight into the problems. I confess, however, that I find it difficult to put myself in the position of a profoundly deaf person. The nearest I can get is by attending a disco or an event with loud music. As I begin to lose my hearing, what is going on around me becomes a bit of a mystery. Most of us would find it difficult to imagine having that difficulty permanently.

The key issues and themes are empowerment, communication and human rights. It is a matter of human rights that people should be able to communicate with other people, play their part in society and, as John Munro mentioned, be able to go about their normal business—go to the doctor, the social work department, or travel on the bus or train. Communication is key to that human right.

The other point I want to make is about the profusion—if I may put it like that—of deaf communities. There is not one deaf community. There are people with different sorts of problems. There are those who are born profoundly deaf, for whom the debate on BSL is most an issue, but there are those who lose their hearing through accident or the advance of age.

I would like to touch on the issue of lip-reading. Although it is a different issue from sign language, it is equally relevant to this debate that tutors of lip-reading struggle to find funding for their work.

The support that is given to the Scottish Association of Sign Language Interpreters has been mentioned. I worked out that the grants for training and core funding total around £45,000. An additional £28,000 was granted last year—£8,000 this year—to SENSE and the Royal National Institute for Deaf People towards training people in British Sign Language. That does not seem a great deal of money even in these cash-strapped days. The Scottish Parliament should address that.

My final point is that recognition of the language as an official language in Scotland and throughout Europe is not itself a solution to the problems, but it is a beginning. As John Farquhar Munro said, it focuses our attention on the issue and will lead to greater pressure on the authorities to produce the additional funding and support. The wider recognition of the language among the general public is necessary to make progress on this issue. Winnie Ewing and Cathy Craigie are to be congratulated on bringing this debate to the Parliament today.

17:36

The Deputy Minister for Communities (Jackie Baillie): I echo the comments that have already been made and commend Winnie Ewing and Cathy Craigie for bringing this matter to the Scottish Parliament for consideration.

The Executive recognises the depth of feeling that surrounds the status of BSL among its users. We are committed to supporting comprehensive and enforceable civil rights for disabled people. I understand that David Blunkett referred to BSL in his recent letter to the Disability Rights Commission concerning its remit and priorities. I also understand that Margaret Hodge, the minister with responsibility for disabled people, will contact the commission to examine the status of BSL.

As many people here will be aware, the Disability Discrimination Act 1995 requires employers and service providers to make reasonable adjustments to ensure that disabled people are not disadvantaged at work or elsewhere. The provision of interpreters is an example, according to the act, of such an adjustment.

The final report of the disability rights task force was published in December. It recognised specifically the needs of deaf people who communicate through BSL, and the need for BSL users to be supported by suitably qualified interpreters. The report contains recommendations in devolved areas. We will look to involve all sectors of society—but disabled people in particular—in our consideration of the report as it affects Scottish interests. We are keen to hear from all those who have an interest in equality for disabled people, particularly regarding the recommendations in devolved areas. The Executive will discuss, with disability groups, the best way in which to facilitate that process.

The Scottish Executive is keeping in touch with the Department for Education and Employment, to ensure that its consideration of the issues is informed by concerns that are aired in Scotland, and that it takes account of distinct Scottish circumstances.

So, what is currently happening? The Scottish Executive provides grant aid of more than £100,000 per year to several organisations that represent deaf people. Additionally, there is approximately £32,000 for training and development of BSL interpreters. Over and above that, the social work services inspectorate report, "Sensing Progress", which was published in 1998, recommended ways to improve communication with deaf people and those who are hard of hearing.

Following on from that, the Scottish Association of Sign Language Interpreters has been commissioned to develop a training strategy—initially for social work staff—in BSL and in other forms of communication.

Dr Winnie Ewing: Is the problem not partly that the present course for the intensive degree of skill is part-time and therefore does not attract statutory funding, so it is too expensive for the average person? Local authorities, big banks and building societies do not seem to be pulling their weight on this issue. I do not think that what Jackie Baillie has said so far will solve the problem, unless there is a full-time university course.

Jackie Baillie: A piece of work is currently being undertaken by the Department for Education and Employment—with the Royal National Institute for Deaf People and the Council for the Advancement of Communication with Deaf People—on proposals to address the shortage of interpreters. That goes directly to the valid point Dr Ewing made. We await that information, to establish what can most usefully be done to move forward on some of these issues. Research has also been commissioned to identify the distribution and level of demand and the specialist skills of interpreters in England, Scotland and Wales. The draft report is expected in the spring and will highlight variations in the number of interpreters available in different areas.

We are aware of—and commend—the work of the many voluntary organisations, including the British Deaf Association, which works to promote deaf people as equal partners in society and campaigns for official recognition of BSL.

The European Parliament passed a resolution on sign languages for deaf people at the end of last year. It—and an earlier resolution—calls on the European Commission to make a proposal to the Council of Ministers on official recognition of sign language used by deaf people in member states. That is an issue of interest to many member states, including ours. The Commission is still to make a response, which we await with considerable interest and impatience.

I welcome the presence of BSL interpreters today. I understand that they are provided by the Edinburgh and East of Scotland Deaf Society. I am sure that deaf and hearing-impaired people will also appreciate it.

We should also be aware of other provisions made in the Parliament for people who are hard of hearing, including the T-loop system in the chamber and infrared systems in some of the committee rooms.

Ultimately, it is a matter not for the Executive but for the Parliament to consider how best to take forward its provision for deaf people and whether signing should be integrated into meetings of the Parliament.

I am sure that the Deputy Presiding Officer will take this matter forward. From an equality perspective and the perspective of the Executive, I would encourage the Parliament seriously to consider this issue. The Scottish Executive is committed to equality of opportunity for all and that, of course, includes equality for people with disabilities.

We are in the process of consulting on the development of an equality strategy for the Executive. I encourage people to respond. In support of our commitment to equality for those who are deaf and hard of hearing we will continue to review and develop services, such as training and provision for BSL interpreters in Scotland.

Mr McGrigor: Will Jackie Baillie give way?

Jackie Baillie: I am winding up now.

We all want a just and inclusive society in Scotland, which—as Winnie Ewing said earlier—enables all our citizens to achieve their full potential. The Executive recognises that lack of access to information and services that hearing people take for granted contributes to a feeling of isolation and social exclusion. I give an undertaking that we will examine the issues that have been raised today, particularly interpreting, which makes a practical difference to people's lives and is fundamental in terms of the Executive's commitment to social inclusion and equality.

The Deputy Presiding Officer: In closing this meeting, I would like to say thank you to all members of the public who stayed for this debate and to the MSPs, and a particular thank you to our interpreters. [Applause.]

Meeting closed at 17:45.
